NATIONAL UNDERWRITER
a division of ALM Media, LLC
CRITICAL ISSUES IN CGL, 4TH EDITION
Hannah E. Smith, Esq., Michael F. Aylward, Esq. Shaun
McParland Baldwin, Esq. Gregory G. Deimling, CPCU, and Carol
P. Keough, Esq.
Critical Issues in CGL, a part of the Commercial Lines Series, is
the comprehensive, go-to source for information regarding
several issues that commonly arise in the use of the Commercial
General Liability form. The book provides the reader with
awareness of some rather obscure, yet critical coverage issues
that arise under the CGL form, such as additional insureds and
contract liability, what is an occurrence, business risk exclusions,
cyber liability, cannabis, and violent events.
Some of these issues are tried and true and have been long tested
in the courts. Other issues are newly-arising, have not yet had the
opportunity to be fully examined by the courts, may not
completely be covered by the CGL policy, or could render CGL
policy holders severely underinsured.
This book will enable the professional to:
•    Understand the way the CGL policy applies to additional insureds
and contractual liability•    Understand the different exclusions that accompany business risk
•    Follow the courts through the murky determination of what
constitutes an occurrence under the CGL policy
•    Navigate arising cyber issues, examine the ISO Cyber Policy and the
NAIC Cyber model law
•    Explore the history of cannabis criminalization, legalization, and the
accompanying CGL issues
The 4th edition of Critical Issues in CGL has been completely
updated to thoroughly examine several hot topics that arise under
the CGL policy and explains the court cases that accompany
those topics. This latest edition features:
•    A new chapter on insuring cannabis risks and exposures
•    Expanded coverage of the ever-looming issue of cyber exposures
•    A new chapter examining mass casualty incident coverage under the
CGL
•    A chart depicting the state laws regarding cannabis legality or
decriminalization
•    A copy of the NAIC Cyber Model law and ISO Cyber policy
Forms, endorsements, model laws, and charts are all included for
reference.
Both the FC&S Bulletins and National Underwriter’s Commercial
General Liability Coverage Guide (Malecki, Thamann, Smith,
2017) dedicate hundreds of pages to the CGL coverage form. The
CGL coverage guide, currently in its Twelfth Edition, is one of
the most consistently used CGL reference sources in the industry.This Critical Issues in CGL book was developed as a logical
progression from the best-selling CGL coverage guide. This
newest CGL offering from the National Underwriter Company
will equip professionals with the information and wherewithal
they need to confidently apply and defend this broad and
complex coverage form, and it will provide the reader with
necessary information on emerging critical issues, such as mass
violent events and cannabis and the CGL.
Also Available from our Coverage Guide series:
•    Businessowners Policy
•    Commercial General Liability
•    Commercial Auto Program
•    Commercial Property
•    Commercial Flood
•    Homeowners
•    Personal Auto Policy
•    Personal Flood I nsurance
•    Personal Umbrella
•    Small Business Auto
•    Workers Compensation
For customer service questions or to place additional orders,
please call 1-800-543-0874 or email
CustomerService@nuco.com.This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the
unde rstanding that the publisher is not engage d in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person
should be sought .— from a Declaration of Principles jointly adopt ed by a
Committee of the American Bar Association and a Committee of Publishers
and A ssociations.
Copyright © 2019, 2014, 2007, 2001 by  
THE NATIONAL UNDERWRITER COMPANY 
4157 O lympic Boulevard 
Suite 225 
Erlanger, KY 41018
Fourth Edition, August 2019 
Third Edition, August 2014 
Second Edition, December 2007
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission of
the publisher.
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with its
permission.
This product includes information which is proprietary to Insurance Services
Office, Inc. ISO does not guarantee the accuracy or timeliness of the ISOinformation provided. ISO shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any
kind and howsoever caused resulting from your use of the ISO information.
Reproductions of and quotations from ISO and AAIS insurance policies and
forms in this book  are copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office,
Inc., and American Association of Insurance Services.
International Standard Book Number: 978- 1-949506- 85-3 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2019909540
Printed in the United States of AmericaAbout the National Underwriter
Company
For over 110 years, The National Underwriter Company has been
the first in line with the targeted tax, insurance, and financial
planning information you need to make critical business
decisions. Boasting nearly a century of expert experience, our
reputable Editors are dedicated to putting accurate and relevant
information right at your fingertips. With Tax Facts, Tools &
Techniques, National Underwriter Advanced Markets, Field
Guide, FC&S®, FC&S Legal and other resources available in
print, eBook, CD, and online, you can be assured that as the
industry evolves National Underwriter will be at the forefront
with the thorough and easy-to-use resources you rely on for
success.
The National Underwriter Company Update
Service Notification
This National Underwriter Company publication is regularly
updated to include coverage of developments and changes that
affect the content. If you did not purchase this publication
directly from The National Underwriter Company and you want
to receive these important updates sent on a 30-day review basis
and billed separately, please contact us at (800) 543-0874. Or you
can mail your request with your name, company, address, and the
title of the book to:The National Underwriter Company
4157 O lympic Boulevard
Suite 225
Erlanger, KY 41018
If you purchased this publication from The National Underwriter
Company directly, you have already been registered for the
update service.
National Underwriter Company Contact
Information
To order any National Underwriter Company title, please
•    call 1-800-543-0874, 8- 6 ET Monday – Thursday and 8 to 5 E T
Friday
•    on line book store at www.nationalunderwriter.com, or
•    mail to The National Underwriter Company, Orders Department,
4157 O lympic Blvd., S te. 225, E rlanger, KY 41018Preface
The commercial general liability policy is the linchpin of business
insurance programs. Virtually all companies carry liability insurance, under
businessowners (BOP), commercial package, or monoline forms. Whether
mom-and-pop operations or multinational corporations, they cannot afford to
operate without general liability insurance.
In the 1970s  the form was called the comprehensive general liability
policy, but that title seemed to imply that all third-party liability risks were
insured. And so it was changed to commercial general liability coverage
form with the 1986 I nsurance Services Office (ISO) edition.
The CGL policy remains one of the broadest coverage forms in the
industry. It promises to pay “those sums that the insured becomes legally
obligated to pay as damages because of ‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’
to which this insurance applies.” It also pledges to defend suits against the
insured as long as the coverage may apply to the allegations.
Despite the breadth and depth of this coverage and its long history, the
application of coverage continues to be debated in agent, insurer, and risk
manager offices—as well as in the courtroom. The editors of the FC&S
Bulletins field their share of questions about how various types of coverage
could be interpreted. Many of those questions involve the CGL form.
Related Publications
Both the FC&S Bulletins and the National Underwriter Company’s
Commercial General Liability (CGL) coverage guide (Malecki, Thamann,
Smith, 2017)  dedicate hundreds of pages to the CGL coverage form. The
CGL coverage guide, currently in its Twelfth Edition, is one of the most
consistently used CGL reference sources in the industry. This Critical Issues
in CGL book  was developed as a logical progression from the best-sellingCGL coverage guide. This newest CGL offering from the National
Underwriter Company will equip professionals with the information and
wherewithal they need to confidently apply and defend this broad and
complex coverage form.
In addition, the cumulative experience of the FC&S staff in dealing with
CGL coverage problems was called upon in designing this book . A few
areas that stood ou t as particular problems are discussed. They are:
•    the business risk exclusions,
•    additional insureds and their interrelationship with contractual
liability coverage,
•    the occurrence trigger’s impact on coverage,
•    cyber liability,
•    cannabis coverage, and
•    mass violent events coverage
The fourth edition provides a distinguished cast of authors to tackle some
of the toughest situations faced in commercial general liability. They are
experienced litigators in their fields and are well-versed presenters and
authors. Their combined expertise will equip the reader with the knowledge
to identify their unique vulnerabilities under the CGL and prepare the reader
to best manage loss thereunder.
Additional Insureds/Contractual Liability
Any business that has entered into a contract with a vendor,
subcontractor, or other business owner has been asked to provide both
contractual liability coverage and additional insured status for one or more
of its contracting partners. This is so much a regular part of the business
landscape that risk managers and insurance agents seldom blink an eye whenasked to provide the coverage. In fact, questions from underwriters about the
contractual relationship and need to provide the coverage often are seen as
needless efforts to prevent business from being conducted.
In reality, many risk managers, business owners, and insurance
practitioners are unaware of how the interplay of these contractual
requirements may impact the named insured—the party that should be most
concerned about its exposures and how they are being managed. The section
written by Carol P. Keough, Esq., outlines and explains many of the
intricacies of this interplay.
Business Risk Exclusions
Five exclusions provide some of the hottest fodde r for debate for
businesspeople and insurance practitioners. They are exclusions j., Damage
to Property; k., Damage to Your Product; l., Damage to Your Work; m.,
Damage to Impaired Property or Property Not Physically Injured; and n.,
Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property. Collectively referred to as
the business risk exclusions, they provide a road map of the difference
between the uninsurable cost of doing business and insurable business
liabilities.
Despite the long-standing history of these or similar exclusions, they
remain some of the most controversial in their application. Shaun McParland
Baldwin, Esq., explains how these exclusions define the coverage that is
available to commercial insurance clients.
What Is an Occurrence?
One of the first premises drilled into insurance novices is that bodily
injury and property damage coverage must be triggered by an occurrence: an
accidental happening that results in injury to a third party. Although the
concept seems simple enough, the way in which occurrences are counted can
have profound effects on insureds and insurers alike.This subject can affect how many self-insured retentions or deductibles
an insured must exhaust before tapping into the insurer’s limits, as well as
how soon excess coverage will be pierced. It can have profound effects on
how much an insurance company must pay and an insured may collect.
Michael F. Aylward, Esq., explains these concepts in detail with substantial
case law references.
Cyber Liability
A majority of Directors and Officers recently surveyed identified cyber
risks as their biggest concern to profitability. However, less than a third of
companies currently hold cyber liability insurance policies.
By illuminating factual trends in cyber-related crimes, while taking a
historical approach to the CGL’s treatment of cyber-related claims, Gregory
G. Deimling offers advice as to how to use the CGL and cyber policies to
build a comprehensive loss prevention scheme.
Cannabis and the CGL
The legalization of marijuana has long been a topic of debate. While
there are many coverage issues that arise with providing CGL for the
cannabis industry that are also standard for any commercial enterprise, the
cannabis industry brings forth some issues that do n ot traditionally arise. This
chapter examines the history of cannabis legalization, the growth process,
and what exposures might and might not be covered under a traditional CGL
policy.
Mass Violence Incidents and the CGL
As the normality of mass shootings and other mass violence events in the
United States increases, insurance implications and liability becomes anissue of contention. This chapter examines the points of coverage and
exclusion for bodily injury and property damage caused by mass violence
incidents under the CGL.
Forms and Endorsements
The 2013 ISO CGL form is reproduced, along with many of the most
often used endorsements for valued reference sake. Also included is the
NAIC Insurance Data Security Model Law, the ISO Commercial Cyber
Policy, for reference, as is a chart of the legality of cannabis and the
accompanying statutes by state and a chart of the data breach notification
laws by state.About the Authors
Michael Aylward is a senior partner in the Boston office of Morrison
Mahoney, LLP where he chairs the Complex Insurance Claims Resolution
group. For over thirty years, Mr. Aylward has specialized in insurance
coverage disputes involving the availability of liability insurance for
complex claims involving CGL policies. He has tried large, multi-party
coverage cases and has argued numerous landmark appeals. He regularly
lectures on insurance, ethics and bad faith claims and is a contributing editor
of the IADC’s flagship publication, Defense Counsel Journal. Mr. Aylward
has taken a leadership role in numerous legal organizations, including the
national Board of Directors of the Defense Research Institute (2000- 2003) ,
Insurance Law Committee (2000- 2002) , and the Reinsurance, Excess and
Surplus Line Insurance Committee of the International Association of
Defense Counsel. He is also a founding member of the DRI Blue Ribbon
Committee on issues confronting the tripartite relationship. Mr. Aylward is a
graduate of Dartmouth College and received his Juris Doctor from the Boston
College Law School.
Shaun McParland Baldwin is a partner based in the Chicago office of
Tressler LLP, concentrating in the areas of insurance coverage, bad faith, and
other insurance-related services. She also has an active appellate practice
and has briefed and argued over 40 appeals in states and federal courts of
appeal. Ms. Baldwin is an avid lecturer on insurance coverage law and has
authored numerous articles. She has taken a leadership role in numerous
legal organizations, including DRI, Member, Vice Chair, 2014 Insurance
Roundtable; Chair, Excess, Umbrella and Surplus Sub-Committee of
Insurance Law Committee; former Chair - Insurance Law Committee, Illinois
Appellate Lawyers Association, Member and Past Director, Illinois
Association of Defense Trial Counsel, Member and Past Director; former
Chair - Amicus Committee, International Association of Defense Counsel,
Member, former Chair - Casualty Insurance Committee, The Foundation of
the International Association of Defense Counsel, Past Director, and
Professional Liability Underwriting Society, Member. Ms. Baldwin wasnamed to the “Top 5 Women Illinois Super Lawyers” for the tenth
consecutive year, has been elected as a fellow of the American Bar
Foundation, honored as a “Corporate Partner Woman of Achievement” by the
National Association of Women Business Owners, and has achieved an AV
Preeminent rating from Martindale-Hubbell. She is a graduate of Northern
Illinois University and received her Juris Doctor from The John Marshall
School of Law, where she graduated with distinction.
Gregory Deimling is a principal in Malecki Deimling Nielander and
Associates, LLC in Erlanger, Kentucky. He has been in the insurance and risk
management industry as an agent, instructor and consultant for over 40 years.
Mr. Deimling provides Risk Management and General Management services
to a diverse group of both public and private firms and individuals covering
a wide range of subject matter and assignments. He provides litigation
support and assistance as an expert witness regarding insurance coverage
interpretation, policy formation, technical analysis of insurance contracts,
and agent, broker and insurer standards of conduct. Mr. Deimling is a
principal in Globe Insurance Agency, Inc., a family owned independent
insurance agency located in Cincinnati, OH. Mr. Deimling received his
CPCU, Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriter designation in 1976. A
member and past president of the Society’s Cincinnati Chapter, and a member
of the CLEW Consultants, Legal, and Expert Witness Section, he has also
served nationally as Secretary-Treasurer, regional vice president, East
Central Region, national governor, member of the Strategic Planning
Committee, and chairman of the Interest Sections Governing Committee and
Budget and Finance Committee. In addition to earning the CPCU designation,
Deimling also holds the AMIM Associate in Marine Management and ARM
Associate in Risk Management designations from the Insurance Institute of
America and other industry designations. Mr. Deimling is a graduate of the
University of Cincinnati with an undergraduate degree in Business
Administration with insurance major. He received his Masters of Business
Administration, majoring in Finance from Xavier University in 1980.
Additional professional affiliations include the national and Ohio
Association of IIABA, the American Association of Insurance Management
Consultants, Cincinnati Insurance Board, and ACORD. Mr. Deimling has
been a featured speaker and an accredited CE instructor at various insurance
venues for personal lines and commercial property, flood insurance, generalliability, risk management, general management consulting, litigation
management, mock trials, the MCS 90 coverage, condominium insurance, and
general property and casualty insurance topics.
Carol Keough is the Managing Attorney at Barita & Keough Law Firm,
PLLC in Houston, Texas. Ms. Keough’s practice provides legal defense and
consultation to Business Owners and HR Directors on employment law
policies, as well as complex litigation including insurance coverage, bad
faith and extra-contractual, property damage and commercial business law.
Prior to forming Barita & Keough, she was a Director with the law firm of
Coats, Rose, Yale, Ryman & Lee. Ms. Keough is a member of the Texas State
and Federal Bar, the American Bar Association in the Tort and Insurance
Law and the Labor and Employment sections, the Houston Bar Association
Litigation and Labor and Employment sections, the Texas Women’s Lawyers,
Association of Woman Attorneys, the Society for Human Resource
Management and DRI. She regularly lectures and writes in the areas of
insurance coverage and extra-contractual liability. Before attending law
school, Ms. Keough worked as a special education teacher. She holds a BA
in psychology from the College of New Rochelle in New York, and M.S. in
education from the State University of New York at New Paltz, and received
her Juris Doctor from the South Texas College of Law.
Hannah Smith, J.D., is a candidate for the CPCU Certification and an
Insurance Editor of the FC&S Bulletins. She is a graduate of the University
of Cincinnati and Chase College of Law. As an editor at FC&S she writes
articles on policy analysis, emerging risks, cases of interest to the insurance
industry, and answers questions from subscribers covering various lines of
business.
She is a regular contributor of articles concerning emerging risks,
personal and commercial lines to PC 360, Claims Magazine, and the
National Underwriter Property & Casualty Magazine. She is editor and co-
author of the Personal Auto Coverage Guide 5th Edition, Commercial
General Liability Coverage Guide 12th Edition, and editor of 2019
Cancellation & Nonrenewal and 2019 Licensing & Surplus Lines book s.
She also writes content for the National Underwriter CLCS training program.About the Publisher
Managing Editor – FC&S Expert Coverage
Interpretation
Christine G. Barlow, CPCU, is Managing Editor of FC&S, Expert
Coverage Interpretation, part of The National Underwriter Company, a
division of ALM Media, LLC. Christine has over 20 years’ experience in the
insurance industry, beginning as a claims adjuster then working as an
underwriter and underwriting supervisor handling personal lines. Before
joining FC&S®, Christine worked as an Underwriting Supervisor for
Maryland Auto Insurance Fund, and as Senior Underwriter/Underwriter for
companies Montgomery Mutual, Old American, Charter Group, and
Nationwide.
Editorial Services
Connie L. Jump, Senior Manager, Editorial Operations
Patti O’Leary, Senior Editorial AssistantTable of Contents
Section I: The Business Risk Doctrine and the Business Risk
Exclusions
Introduction
The Business Risk Doctrine
The Insuring Agreement
The Business Risk Exclusions
Exclusion j.—Damage to Property
Exclusion k.—Damage to “Your Product”
Exclusion l.—Damage to “Your Work”
Exclusion m.—Damage to Impaired Property or Property
Not Physically Injured
Exclusion n.—Recall of Products, Work or Impaired
Property
Conclusion
Section II: Additional Insureds and Contractual Liability
Risk Shifting—A Critical Part of Commercial Business
The Scope of Additional Insured Endorsements
Contractual Risk-Shifting Common
Typical Additional Insured Endorsements
Difference between Additional Insured and Contractual
Liability Coverage
Courts Broadly Interpret “Arising out of” Wording“Arising out of” Equates to Broad Coverage in Many
Jurisdictions
Broad Coverage for an Additional Insured, but Not
Unlimited
Underwriter Evaluations of Risk
New Trend to Restrict Additional Insured Coverage
The Policy and The Contract – Are They Separate and
Independent?
Different Types of Additional Insured Status
Coverage Limits in Primary Policies Need More Careful
Examination
Analysis of the Coverage Needed Must Include Many
Factors
Potential Agent E&O Problem
Level of Care
Contractual Liability Issues
Insured Contracts
Contractual Indemnity Wording
Hold Harmless Wording and Defense Costs
Assume the Tort Liability of Another
Potential Conflict
Fair Notice
Additional Insureds and Defense Costs
Who Pays First?
Primary and Noncontributory Coverage—CG 20 01 04 13
Careful Reading of The Contract: What Is Agreed?
Insurance Company Review of ContractsFailing to Add an Additional Insured
Certificate of Insurance Issues
Problems with Certificates of Insurance and Additional
Insured Status
Best Practices for Getting the Right Insurance for the
Insured and the Additional Insured
Conclusion
Section III: One Occurrence, Two Occurrences . . .
The Role of Occurrence Wordings
Limiting Coverage
Trigger of Coverage Distinguished
Policy Wordings and Occurrences Determinations
Indemnity Limits
Definition of Occurrence
Aggregates
Stacking and Anti-stacking Clauses
Batch Clauses
Annualization: Multi-Year Policies
Combined Single Limits
Cases in Which Disputes Arise
Multiple Plaintiffs
Multiple Insureds
Widespread Injuries
Parties to Occurrence Disputes
Insured versus Insurer
Insurer versus InsurerInsurer versus Reinsurer
Legal Tests for Counting Occurrences
Cause Meanings
Burden of Proof Issues
External Factors Impacting Occurrence Determinations
Role of Insured
Physical Proximity/Continuity of Damage
Insured’s Coverage Profile
Case Law Survey
Premises Liability Claims
Food Poisoning Claims
Construction Defect and Building Claims
Discrimination Claims: Housing and Employment
Environmental Liability Claims
Molestation and Sexual Assault Claims
Nursing Home Claims
Shooting and Criminal Assault Claims
Products Liability Claims
Toxic Tort Litigation
Conclusion
Section IV: Cyber Liability
The Epidemic of Cybercrime
Types of Cybercrimes
Computer-Targeted Crimes
Financial Crimes
Exploitation CrimesOpportunity Costs
Cybercrime in the United States
Correlation of U.S. Cybersecurity Expenditure to Detected
Events
Curbing Cybercrime
Acceptable Losses from Cybercrime
The Cost of a Data Breach
Direct Cost
Indirect Cost
Opportunity Cost
A Change of Culture
Everybody Is a Publisher
Cyber Liability
Applicability of the CGL Policy to Cyber Risk Exposures
In the Beginning – Y2K
Covered Territory
Tangible Property
Personal and Advertising Injury
Electronic Data
Recording and Distribution of Material or Information in
Violation of Law
Distribution of Material in Violation of Statutes
Absolute Exclusion
Endorsement CG 21 06 05 14
Endorsement CG 21 07 05 14
NAIC Model Law and ISO Policy
Complex UnderwritingThe Coverage Availability
New Optional Coverage
Third-Party Outsourcing
A Risk Management Approach to Cyber
Conclusions and Trends
Section V: Cannabis and the CGL
Introduction
Is it Cannabis or Marijuana?
History
History of Legalization
The Supply Chain
Seed
Production
Seed-to-Sale Software
Branding
Sale
CGL and Cannabis
The Policy
Products Liability
Cannabis Product Liability Lawsuits
The Pollution Exclusion
N. Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property
Personal and Advertising Injury
Conclusion
Section VI: Mass Violence Incidents and the CGLIntroduction
Definition of Mass Violence Incidents
CGL in General
Legal Liability After a Mass Violent Event
Objective or Subjective Standard
Expected or Intended Injury Exclusion
From the Standpoint of the Insured
Workers Compensation and Similar Laws Exclusion
War Exclusion
Conclusion
Appendix A: ISO Forms 211
Appendix B: The Status of Data Breach Notification Laws in
the United States 303
Appendix C: NAIC – Insurance Data Security Model Law
307
Appendix D: Cannabis State-by-State Basis 325
Index 331
Case Index 339The Business Risk Doctrine and
the Business Risk Exclusions
SECTION I
By: Shaun McParland Baldwin, Esq.
Introduction
Commercial general liability (“CGL”) policies provide coverage for the
risk that the insured’s work or product may cause “property damage” to a
third person’s property. The scope of that coverage, however, is not
unlimited. As stated by the court in American States Insurance Co. v.
Mathis, 974 S .W.2d 647, 649 ( Mo.App. 1998) :
The intent of such policies is to protect against the unpredictable and
potentially unlimited liability that can result from accidentally causing
injury to other persons or their property… A commercial general
liability policy is not intended to protect business owners against every
risk of operating a business.…
Id. at 649. This concept was also addressed in James T. Hendrick &
James P. Wiezel, The New Commercial General Liability Forms an
Introduction and Critique, 36 Fed’n Ins. & Corp. Couns. Q. 319, 322
(Summer 1986) , where the authors stated:
It is not the function of the CGL policy to guarantee the technical
competence and integrity of business management. The CGL policy does
not serve as a performance bond, nor does it serve as a warranty of
goods  or services. It does not ordinarily contemplate coverage forlosses which are a normal, frequent or predictable consequence of the
business operations. Nor does it contemplate ordinary business
expense, or injury and damage to others which results by intent or
indifference.
The insuring agreement in the CGL policy itself imposes limitations on
the coverage. The policy applies only to damages payable because of
“property damage,” a defined term under the policy. In addition, the
“property damage” must be caused by an “occurrence” or accident. The
“property damage” must take place during the policy period and not be
known by the insured to have occurred, in whole or in part, prior to the
inception of the policy. Once those threshold requirements are met, the policy
exclusions further limit the risks covered by the CGL policy.
Some of the most litigated exclusions in the CGL policy are the “business
risk” exclusions. These exclusions apply solely to property damage claims.
The business risk exclusions are designed to make certain that the insured’s
responsibility for the performance and quality of its own work or products is
not passed off to its liability insurer. A secondary purpose is to prevent
policyholders from obtaining first-party type protections from their liability
insurance. The CGL exclusions that fall into the category of “business risk
exclusions” and that are discussed below are: 1) Exclusion j. – Damage to
property, 2) Exclusion k. –.Damage to “your product,” 3) Exclusion l. –
Damage to “your work,” 4) Exclusion m. – Damage to “impaired property,”
and 5) Exclusion n. – R ecall or sistership exclusion.
The business risk exclusions are an expression of the “business risk
doctrine.” That doctrine permeates all aspects of the property damage
liability coverage.
The purpose of this section is to provide a general overview of the
business risk exclusions contained in coverage part A of the 2013 CGL
coverage form drafted by the Insurance Services Office as well as the prior
versions of the CGL policy form. This section relies upon this standard form
because that policy form is used by insurers throughout the United States
without any significant variation. The section will first address the business
risk doctrine that underlies the business risk exclusions and other limitations
in the property damage liability coverage. It will then explain the limitationsof the property damage liability insuring agreement. Finally, each of the
business risk exclusions are addressed in greater detail.
The Business Risk Doctrine
Business risks have been defined as the “normal, frequent, or predictable
consequences of doing business and which business management can and
should control and manage.” Columbia Mut. Ins. Co. v. Schauf, 967 S.W.2d
74, 77 (Mo. banc 1998) . Excluding these risks lowers insurance rates and
provides incentives for the insured to perform business effectively. As noted
by the Minnesota Court of Appeals in Thommes v. Milwaukee Mutual Ins.
Co., 622 N.W.2d 155, 159-60 (Minn. App. 2001) , aff’d, 641 N.W.2d 877
(2002) :
The business risk doctrine is the expression of a public policy applied
to the insurance coverage provided under commercial general liability
policies.… Reduced to its simplest terms, the risk that an insured’s
product will not meet contractual standards is a business risk not
covered by a general liability policy…. To ensure predictable and
affordable insurance rates, the business risk doctrine limits an insurer’s
assumption of risk to those risks that are beyond the “effective control”
of the insured.
(Citations omitted).
In its simplest terms, business risks are those risks that management can
and should control because of the nature of the business operations, for
example, the risks that relate to the repair or replacement of faulty work or
products. These risks are a normal, foreseeable and expected incident of
doing business and should be reflected in the price of the product or service
rather than as a cost of insurance to be shared by others. See Sphe re Drake
Ins. Co. v. Tremco, Inc., 513 N.W.2d 473, 477 (Minn. App. 1994)  review
denied (Minn. Apr. 28, 1994) .
Since the quality of the insured’s work is a “business risk” that is solely
within an insured’s own control, liability insurance generally does notprovide coverage for claims arising out of the failure of the insured’s product
or work to meet the quality or specifications for which the insured may be
liable as a matter of contract.
This doctrine prevents “the oppor tunity or incentive for the insured
general contractor to be less than optimally diligent in . . . the performance of
his contractual obligations to complete a project in a good workmanlike
manner.” Wanzek Constr., Inc. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau, 679 N.W.2d
322, 326 (Minn. 2004) . In short, the business risk doctrine prevents a
contractor who performed unsatisfactory work and received compensation
for that work, from being paid a second time by its insurer in order to fix the
unsatisfactory work. Thus, while an insured may have a contractual
obligation to make good on its products or work, or to replace or rebuild
deficient products or work, that is a not a risk covered under the CGL policy.
The seminal case on this subject is Weedo v. Stone-E-Brick, Inc., 405
A.2d 788 (1979) . There, the Supreme Court of New Jersey summarized the
policy underlying the business risk doctrine, as follows:
The risk intended to be insured is the possibility that the goods ,
products or work of the insured, once relinquished or completed, will
cause bodily injury or damage to property other than to the product or
completed work itself, and for which the insured may be found liable.
The insured may be liable as a matter of contract law to make good on
products or work which is defective. This may even extend to an
obligation to completely replace or rebuild the deficient product or
work. This liability, however, is not what the coverages in question are
designed to protect against. The coverage is for tort liability for
physical damages to others and not for economic loss because the
product or completed work is not that for which the damaged person
bargained.”
Id., 405 A .2d a t 791 ( quoting H enderson, supra, note 13 a t 441) .
The court in Centex Homes Corp v. Prestressed Systems, 444 So.2d 66,
67 (1984) , likewise explained:If insurance proceeds could be used to pay for the repairing and/or
replacing of poorly constructed products, a contractor or sub-contractor
could receive initial payment for its work and receive subsequent
payment from the insurance company to repair or replace it. Equally
repugnant on policy grounds is the notion that the presence of insurance
obviates the obligation to perform the job initially in a workmanlike
manner.
The public policy inspiring the business risk doctrine has largely been
incorporated into the language of the standard CGL policy. Some courts cite
to the “business risk doctrine” to justify enforcement of their interpretation of
whether the claim involves “property damage” caused by an “occurrence” in
the first instance, as well as support for application of the business risk
exclusions. However, today, most courts only view the business risk doctrine
as merely the public policy concern behind the language in CGL policies.
Even in Minnesota, a strong propon ent of the business risk doctrine, the
courts have recognized that it is the policy language itself that should govern
the rights and obligations of the parties. As the Supreme Court in Thommes v.
Milwaukee Mutual Ins. Co., 641 N .W.2d a t 882 ( 2002) , obs erved:
If parties to an insurance contract demonstrate their intent, using clear
and unambiguous language . . . then there is no need to look to business
risk principles to ascertain whether the policy was intended to cover
such risks.
The Insuring Agreement
Before considering the “business risk” exclusions, it is important to
determine whether the claim falls within the insuring agreement in the first
place. The insuring agreement states that the insurer will pay “those sums that
the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of
‘property damage’ to which this insurance applies.” In addition, the
“property damage” must be caused by an “occurrence,” take place during the
policy period and not be known to have occurred, in whole or in part, by the
insured prior to the policy period. Both “property damage” and “occurrence”are defined terms in the CGL policy. These definitions also contain important
limitations to the scope of coverage provided by the CGL policy.
A. Is there a claim for “Property Damage”?
The term “property damage” has been defined in the CGL policy as:
a.    Physical injury to tangible property, including all resulting loss of use
of that property. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the
time of the physical injury that caused it; or
b.    L oss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured. All such
loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the “occurrence”
that caused it.
In 2001, t he following language was added to the definition:
For the purposes of this insurance, electronic data is not tangible
property.
As used in this definition, electronic data means information, facts or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted to or from
computer software, including systems and applications software, hard
or floppy  disks, CD-ROMS, taps, drives, cells, data processing devices
or any other media which are used with electronically controlled
equipment.
More significant than the clarification regarding electronic data was the
change in another aspect of the definition between the 1966 C GL form and all
subsequent forms. In the 1966 form, the definition of “property damage” did
not require “physical injury to tangible property.” It merely required “injury
to tangible property.” Thus, policies containing the earlier form of the
definition were often required to respond to claims for economic loss and
diminution of value. See, e.g., Bowman Steel Corp. v. Lumbermens Mut.
Cas. Co., 364 F.2d 246 (3d Cir. 1966)  (diminution in value to claimant’s
building resulting from the attachment of the insured’s defective siding
qualified as “injury to tangible property” under the 1966 CGL coverage
form).The significance of the requirement of “physical injury to tangible
property” was addressed in Tobi Engineering, Inc. v. Nationwide Mutual
Ins. Co., 214 Ill.App.3d 692, 574 N.E.2d 160 (1st Dist. 1991) . In that case,
the insured was sued for failure to timely deliver non-defective bearing pads.
The insured sought a defense from its insurer under the “property damage”
coverage. The court concluded that since the underlying claims sought only
the return of the purchase price and reimbursement of delay damages, the
claims were only for “intangible,” purely “economic” losses. Thus, the
claims did not involve “property damage” that required “physical injury to
tangible property.”
The Illinois Supreme Court discussed in detail the significance of the
change in the policy definition of “property damage” in Travelers Ins. Co. v.
Eljer Mfg, Inc., 197 Ill.2d 278 (2001) . In Eljer, thousands of products
liability claims were filed against the policyholder by persons who owned
homes in which the Qest plumbing system had been installed. Many of these
claims involved homes in which the Qest plumbing system had leaked.
However, some of the claims involved buildings that had not experienced
leaks, but the homeowners removed the Qest plumbing system as a
preventative measure. Those homeowners sought reimbursement from the
insured for the costs of removing and replacing the plumbing system.
The insured argued that all of the claims involved “property damage” and
that the “property damage” occurred at the time that the allegedly defective
Qest plumbing system was installed in the home. The Illinois Supreme Court
disagreed. It held that the mere propensity of the Qest system to leak
prematurely, without actual leaking, did not qualify as “physical injury to
tangible property.” Thus, those complaints that sought reimbursement for
removal and replacement of the allegedly defective pipes did not seek
damages because of “property damage.” The court explained:
Although a claimant may understandably be concerned by reports that an
estimated five percent of the Qest systems have experienced failures,
the damage caused to a home by the removal of a functional system
prior to a leak does not constitute “physical injury to tangible property”
arising from a covered occurrence under the policies. The “injury”
caused by the Qest system under these facts flows from the claimant’sdisappointed commercial expectations in the performance of the Qest
system and is not an injury which is “physical” in nature. As stated, the
post-1981 policies do not provide coverage for economic loss claims
against the policyholders. Consistent with the policy language agreed
upon by the parties to the insurance contract, the insurers did not consent
to become guarantors of the product quality or the performance of the
Qest systems. We therefore agree with the insurers in their cross-appeal
that the appellate court erred in finding that coverage under the post-
1981 policies may be triggered prior to the occurrence of an actual leak
if, in the course of replacing the Qest system, actual physical damage is
caused to the home itself.
Id. at 308.
Numerous other courts have similarly noted the significance of the
requirement in the “property damage” definition that the claim involve
“physical” injury to tangible property. See, e.g., Aetna Casualty & Sur. Co.
v. McIbs, Inc., 684 F. Supp. 246, 248 (Nev. 1988)  (the inclusion of the word
“physical” in this policy was designed to preclude recovery for
consequential or intangible damages such as a diminution or depreciation in
value); Dewitt Constr. Inc. v. Charter Oak Fire Ins. Co., 307 F.3d 1127,
1134 n.4 (9th Cir. 2002)  (proof of diminished value would not be sufficient
to establish property damage because the policy requires physical injury as
oppos ed to injury); Utica Mut. Ins. Co. v. Weathermark Investments, Inc.,
292 F.3d 77, 82 (1st Cir. 2002)  (diminution in the fair market value of
property is not within scope of coverage; the definition of “property damage”
plainly does not encompass this type of intangible economic loss); Aetna Life
& Cas. v. Patrick Indus ., Inc., 645 N.E.2d 656 (Ind. Ct. App. 1995)
(diminution in value arising out of the insured’s defective particle board was
not “property damage” within the 1973 definition); Neth. Ins. Co. v. Main St.
Ingredients, LLC, 2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 5018 (8th Cir. Minn. Mar. 18,
2014)  (instant oatmeal was not physically injured when dried milk used in
the product was recalled).
In Esicorp, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 266 F.3d 859, 863 (8th Cir.
2001) , the court also considered whether claims for the cost of removal and
repair of the insured’s defective product qualified as damages because of“property damage.” The insured argued that the cost should be covered as
“property damage” because the removal of its product, defective shop welds,
required the invasion of pipe sections already integrated into the pipe system
in the construction project. The court rejected the policyholder’s argument
that the mere incorporation of the defectively welded pipe sections into the
pipe system was covered “property damage.” The court held that there is no
“property damage” “unless and until the incorporation of a defective product
or component results in ‘physical injury to tangible property’ in at least some
part of the system.” Id. at 863. See also, Sokol & Co. v. Atlantic Mut. Ins.
Co., 430 F.3d 417 (7th Cir. 2005)  (spoiled peanut butter packets supplied by
a food products manufacturer to customer for inclusion in customer’s cookie
mix boxes did not cause “physical injury to tangible property” despite
manufacturer having to open each box to remove and replace each packet and
experiencing delays in getting the cookie mix to the market); Fidelity &
Deposit Co. of Md .v. Hartford Cas. Ins Co., 215 F.Supp. 1171, 1181 (D.
Kan. 2002) (mere incorporation of the insured’s faulty workmanship into a
building was not “property damage”); Amtrol Inc. v Tudor  Ins. Co., 2002
WL 31194863 (D. Mass. 2002)  (leaks from the insured’s product, a hot
water maker, which resulted in no physical injury to third-party property did
not constitute “property damage”); Seagate Tech., Inc. v. St. Paul Fire &
Marine Ins. Co., 11 F.Supp.2d 1150 (N.D. Cal. 1998)  (insured’s supply of
defective disk drives that were incorporated into the plaintiff’s products
were not covered as there was no allegation of “physical injury”); F&H
Constr. v. ITT Hartford Ins. Co. of the Midwest, 118 Cal. App. 4th 364
(2004)  (incorporation of a defective component or product into a larger
structure does not constitute property damage unless and until the defective
component causes physical injury to tangible property in at least some other
part of the system); Lennar  Corp. v. Great Am. Ins. Co., 200 S.W. 651 (Tex.
Ct. App. 2006)  (costs incurred in removing and replacing an exterior stucco
used on homes built by the insured to prevent future physical injury to homes
that had not yet experienced water damage due to defects in the stucco could
not be considered damages because of “property damage”).
While the first prong of the definition of “property damage” requires
physical injury, the second prong does not. It requires “loss of use of tangible
property that is not physically injured.” The important element in any claim
for “loss of use” is that the loss must be to tangible property. This conceptwas discussed in Bituminous  Casualty Corp. v. Gust K. Newberg Constr.
Co., 218 Ill.App.3d  956, 578 N.E.2d 1003 (1st Dist. 1991) , appeal denied,
143 Ill.2d 636, 587 N.E.2d 1011 (1992) . In Bituminous , the insured was
sued because of its installation of a faulty heating, air conditioning, and
ventilation system. The underlying complaint alleged that high temperatures
in the building made employees ill and unable to work. The court found that
the allegations in the complaint were insufficient to constitute a “loss of use,”
since the building was never unoccupied or unused as a result of the
allegedly faulty heating, air conditioning, and ventilation systems.
Consequently, the court found the insurer had no duty to defend, be cause there
had been no “loss of use” relative to tangible property.
In contrast, where faulty construction or construction delays cause a
temporary inability to use a new or existing building, or other structure, a
court may find “property damage” under the “loss of use” prong. For
example, in Gibraltar Casualty Co. v. Sargent & Lundy , 214 Ill.App.3d 768
(1st Dist. 1990) , appeal denied 141 Ill.2d 540 (1991) , the court held that the
delay in the construction of a nuclear power plant and temporary inability to
use the property constituted a “loss of use” triggering coverage under the
general liability policy. The court noted that “loss of use” is the loss of the
right to use property, which is an incident of ownership. Such a loss in
“ownership,” even if temporary, should trigger an insurer’s duty to defend
under the “property damage” provision of a CGL policy.
B. Was the Property Damage Caused by an “Occurrence”?
The next significant limitation to coverage is that the “property damage”
must be caused by an “occurrence.” That term is defined as: “an accident,
including continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general
harmful conditions.” Courts have defined the term “accident” in various
ways. For example, in Kvaerner Metals Division of Kvaerner v.
Commercial Union Insurance Co., 589 Pa. 317, 908 A.2d 888, 897-88 (Pa.
2006) , the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held that an “accident” is “‘[a]n
unexpected and undesirable event,’ or ‘something that occurs unexpectedly or
unintentionally.’” In Stoneridge Dev. Co. v. Essex Ins. Co., 382 Ill. App. 3d
731 (Ill. App. Ct. 2d Dist. 2008) , the Illinois appellate court held that an
accident is an “unforeseen occurrence, usually of an untoward or disastrouscharacter or an undesigned, sudden or unexpected event of an inflictive or
unfortunate character. The natural and ordinary consequences of an act do not
constitute an accident.” In Kalchthaler v. Keller Construction Co., 224 Wis.
2d 387, 397, 591 N.W.2d 169 (Ct. App. 1999) , the Wisconsin Court of
Appeals held that “[a]n accident is an `event or change occurring without
intention or volition through carelessness, unawareness, ignorance, or a
combination of causes and producing an unfortunate result.’” This definition
was cited with approval in American Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. American
Girl, Inc., 268 W eis.2d 16, 673 N .W.2d 54 ( 2004) .
There are four competing lines of authority regarding whether faulty
workmanship claims constitute an “occurrence” and thus fall within the
scope of the insuring agreement of the policy.
Some courts hold that such claims do not involve “property damage”
caused by an “occurrence” because the natural and ordinary consequences of
faulty workmanship is the destruction, damage, or failure of the insured’s
work or the insured’s product. This rationale finds particular support where
the claims asserted against the insured are solely breach of contract claims
and the claims involve solely the insured’s own work or product. Claims in
which property damage is alleged to have been caused by an insured’s
breach of contract have often been deemed by courts not to be the result of an
“occurrence” because such property damage is viewed as a “normal,
expected consequence” of the insured’s breach of contract that is “foreign to
the risk insured against.” Courts have, therefore, held that property damage
caused by an insured’s failure to perform its contract in a workmanlike
manner or its use of inferior materials in the performance of its contract falls
outside the insuring agreement because such property damage is not the result
of an accident.
This analysis was exemplified in American States Insurance Co. v.
Mathis, 974 S.W.2d 647 (Mo. App. 1998) . In that case, the insured
constructed certain trenches and duct banks at the wrong grade and slope.
Other contractors had to tear out, retrench, and reinstall the improperly
constructed duct banks. The insured was sued for breach of contract,
negligence and negligent misrepresentation. The court held that the insured’s
breach of a construction contract was not an accident, and, thus, was not an“occurrence” within the meaning of the policy at issue. The court upheld the
insurer’s denial of coverage for the claim, explaining that:
Such a breach of a defined contractual duty cannot fall within the term
“accident.” Performance of its contract according to the terms specified
therein was within [the insured’s] control and management and its
failure to perform cannot be described as an undesigned or unexpected
event.
Id. at 650.
That view was embraced by the court in Hotel Roanok e Conference
Center Comm. v. Cincinnati Ins. Co., 303 F.Supp. 2d 784, 788 (W.D. Va.
2004) . In that case, the court held that the word “accident” as used in the
definition of “occurrence” “involves a degree of fortuity not present when the
insured’s defective performance of a contract causes injury to the insured’s
own work or product.” See, also, Norwalk Ready Mixed Concrete v.
Travelers Ins. Cos., 246 F.3d 1132, 1137 (8th Cir. 2001)  (defective
workmanship cannot be characterized as an accident under Iowa law); Union
Ins. Co. v. Hottenstein, 83 P.3d 1196 (Co. Ct. App. 2003) (an “accident” is
an unusual or unanticipated result flowing from a commonplace cause;
breach of contract following from poor  workmanship is no such accident).
This reasoning was also employed by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in
Kvaerner, supra. Kvaerner was sued for breach of contract and breach of
warranty because the “Coke Oven Battery” it manufactured for Bethlehem
Steel was alleged to be damaged, and did not meet contract specifications or
applicable industry standards. As a result of property damage to the Battery
(including sheared joints, broken outer blocks, spalling walls, bowed
housings, etc), Bethlehem Steel sought either “the amount that it will cost to
replace the Coke Oven Battery or the difference in value between the
defective Coke Oven Battery that it received and the Coke Oven Battery that
the insured warranted that it would deliver. The court held that the definition
of ”accident” required to establish an “occurrence” under the CGL policy
cannot be satisfied by claims based upon faulty workmanship. It explained:
Such claims simply do not present the degree of fortuity contemplated
by the ordinary definition of “accident” or its common judicialconstruction in this context. To hold otherwise would be to convert a
policy for insurance into a performance bond. We are unwilling to do
so, especially since such protections are readily available for
protection of contractors [through, for example, a builder’s risk policy
or a professional liability policy, both of which had paid out money on
Kvaerner’s behalf].
Kvaerner, supra, 589 Pa. at 335-36. Accord, Brosnahan Builders, Inc. v.
Harleysville Mut. Ins. Co., 137 F. Supp. 2d 517 (D. Del. 2001) ; Cincinnati
Ins. Co. v. Motorists Mut. Ins. Co., 306 S.W.3d 69 (Ky. 2010) ; L-J, Inc. and
Eagle Creek Const. Co. v. Bituminous  Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 366 S.C.
117, 621 S.E.2d 33 (2005) ; Mello Constr., Inc. v. Acadia Ins. Co., 2007
Mass. App. LEXIS 1063 (Mass. App. Ct. 2007) ; Pursell Constr., Inc. v.
Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 596 N .W.2d 67 ( Iowa 1999) .
Contrary authority, however, also exists, and it may now be the majority.
Several state courts have retreated from the view that claims sounding in
contract and involving faulty workmanship can never involve a covered
“occurrence.” Even some of the decisions relied upon in Kvaerner have now
been reversed. More courts are now finding that faulty workmanship may be
an “occurrence” under various circumstances.
In Lamar Homes Inc. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co., 242 S.W.3d 1 (Tex.
Sup. Ct. 2007) , the Texas Supreme Court held that breach of a contract can
constitute an “occurrence” where the defective construction is a product of
negligence. That determination, according to the court, is based on the
allegations of the complaint. The court noted, with reference to the complaint
filed against the insured, that no one alleged that the insured intended or
expected its work or its subcontractor’s work to damage the claimant’s home.
Id. Accordingly, the court found that an “occurrence” had been alleged.
Accord, American Family Ins. Co. v. American Girl, Inc., 673 N.W.2d 65
(Wis. 2004)  (property damage to building due to improper soil preparation
was caused by an “occurrence”).
The court in Capstone Bldg. Corp. v. Am. Motorists Ins. Co., 308 Conn.
760 (Conn. 2013)  also determined that a contractual breach can be an
“occurrence” in rare instances. In that case, a contractor was hired by a
university to build a student housing complex. After the project was finished,the university found multiple defects. The defects were remedied by a
subcontractor. The insurer argued that since the defects stemmed from a
breach of contract they would not be covered. The court disagreed, citing to
the ever expanding definition of what constitutes an “occurrence.”
Among those states that have found that faulty workmanship can constitute
an “occurrence,” three views have emerged on what circumstances must exist
in order for faulty workmanship to qualify as an “occurrence.” The first view
is that an “occurrence” will be found only if the insured did not subjectively
intend to perform defective work and the damages were not expected or
intended. K & L Homes, Inc. v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., 2013 ND 57
(N.D. 2013), embraced that approach. The court found that if the faulty
workmanship was not intentional, and therefore, unexpected, then faulty
workmanship may constitute an “occurrence.” This subjective intent
viewpoint is intended to reinforce the notion that the CGL policy is designed
to cover only fortuitous losses. Courts following this view include: Sheehan
Const. Co., Inc. v. Continental Ins. Co., 935 N. E. 2d 160 (Ind. 2010) ;
Capstone Bldg. Corp. v. Am. Motorists Ins. Co., 308 Conn. 760 (Conn.
2013) ; U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. J.S.U.B., Inc., 979 So. 2d 871 (Fla. 2007) ; D.R.
Sherry Constr., Ltd. v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., 316 S.W.3d 899 (Mo.
2010)  (faulty home construction was determined to be unexpected and
unforeseeable, and therefore the faulty workmanship could be seen as an
“occurrence”); Corner Const. Co. v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co., 638 N.W. 2d
887 (S.D. 2002)  (“occurrences” need only be undesigned, sudden, and
unexpected); Cherrington v. Erie Prop. & Cas. Co., 745 S.E. 2d 508 (W.Va.
2013)  (anytime there is damage caused by faulty workmanship that is not
deliberate, intentional, expected, de sired, or foreseen it is an “occurrence”).
Other courts have found that damage caused by the defective work to
other non-defective portions of the work or property qualifies as an
“occurrence” without focusing on the subjective intent of the insured, but
presuming such third party property damage was caused by an accident. See,
e.g., Owners Ins. Co. v. Jim Carr Homebuilder, LLC, 2014 Ala. LEXIS 44
(Ala. Mar. 28, 2014) (while there is no coverage for the cost of repairing
faulty work, there is coverage to fix damage caused by the faulty work);
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Home Pride Cos., 268 Neb. 528 (Neb. 2004)
(faulty workmanship standing alone is not an occurrence, but an accidentcaused by faulty workmanship is an occurrence); Dodson v. St. Paul Ins.
Co., 812 P.2d 372 (Okla. 1991)  (faulty workmanship provides coverage to
damage other than that upon which the insured worked); S.C. CODE ANN.
§38-61-70 (2011) (definition of “occurrence” may include any damage
except that of remedying the faulty workmanship); Webster v. Acadia Ins.
Co., 934 A. 2d 567 (N.H. 2007)  (unexpected physical injury to other
property is an “occurrence”); Lagas tee-Mulder, Inc. v. Consol. Ins. Co., 682
F.3d 1054 (7th Cir. 2012)  (damage done to other property is an “occurrence”
of faulty construction); Firemen’s Fund Ins. Co. of Newark v. National
Union Fire Ins. Co., 904 A. 2d 754 (N.J. Super Ct. App. Div. 2006)  (for
faulty workmanship to constitute an “occurrence,” there must be damage to
other property); William C. Vick Constr. Co., v Pennsylvania Nat’l Mut. Ins.
Co., 52 F. Supp. 2d 569 (E.D.N.C. 1999)  (faulty construction causing leaks
in a building that damaged other property may constitute an “occurrence”),
aff’d 213 F . 3d 634 ( 4th Cir. 2000) .
Lastly, some courts consider all faulty workmanship to be an
“occurrence,” and instead focus on whether the exclusions sufficiently
incorporate the business risk doctrine to preclude coverage for the loss. For
example, in U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. JSUB, Inc., 979 So. 2d 871 (2007) , the
Florida Supreme Court observed:
In this case, if the insuring provisions do not confer an initial grant of
coverage for faulty workmanship, there would be no reason for U.S.
Fire to exclude damage to “your work”:
If . . . losses actionable in contract are never CGL “occurrences” for
purposes of the initial coverage grant, then the business risk exclusions
are entirely unnecessary. The business risk exclusions eliminate
coverage for liability for property damage to the insured’s own work or
product-liability that is typically actionable between the parties
pursuant to the terms of their contract, not in tort. If the insuring
agreement never confers coverage for this type of liability as an original
definitional matter, then there is no need to specifically exclude it. Why
would the insurance industry exclude damage to the insured’s own work
or product if the damage could never be considered to have arisen from
a covered “occurrence” in the first place?Id. at 886-887 citing Am. Fam. Mut. Ins. Co. v. American Girl, Inc., 673
N. W. 2d 65, 78 (WI. 2004) . Accord Lamar Homes, supra, 242 S.W.3d at 12
(“by incorporating the subcontractor exception into the ‘your work’
exclusion, the insurance industry specifically contemplated coverage for
property damage caused by a subcontractor’s defective performance”); Erie
Ins. Exch. v. Colony Dev. Corp., 2003-Ohio-7232 (Ohio Ct. App., Franklin
County Dec. 31, 2003)  (failure of a contractor to perform an adequate job is
an occurrence, requiring the need for a “your work” exclusion); Auto Owners
Ins. Co. v. Newman, 385 S .C. 187, 684 S .E. 2d 541 ( 2009) .
It should also be noted that some states have enacted statutes to give more
clarity to the meaning of the term “occurrence” or to tacitly overrule
jurisdictional law. Those include Ark. Code Ann. §23-79-155 (2011); Colo.
Rev. Stat. 13-20-808 (2010) ; Haw. Rev. Stat. §431:1-217; and S.C. Code
Ann. §38-61-70 (2011).
The Business Risk Exclusions
Whether a claim involves “property damage” caused by an “occurrence”
and when and how the business risk exclusions apply has generated much
misunderstanding and controversy. These issues affect both the design and the
implementation of a liability insurance program. The claims often pose
difficult questions of interpretation and involve hundreds and thousands of
dollars. As a result, some of the most litigated issues in insurance law have
involved the business risk exclusions. Because the business risk exclusions
may affect only a portion of the claimed damages in a given case, it is
important to understand not only their application, but also their limitations.
In Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Ins. v. Lynne, 686 N.W.2d 118 (2004) ,
the North Dakota Supreme Court noted that the purpose of the business risk
exclusions is to prevent policyholders from converting liability insurance
into protection from foreseeable business risks. The court noted that
insurance companies theorize that a business risk, such as costs resulting
from improper performance of a contract, should be built into the price of the
product. The court further observed:Business risk exclusions are intended to provide coverage for tort
liability, but not for contract liability of the insured for loss because the
product or completed work was not that for which the other party had
bargained…. The exclusions are meant to remove coverage for risks
which are subject to manipulation by the insured or a third party.
Id. at 124 ( citations omitted).
Not all courts concur with the concept that CGL coverage is limited to
tort liability. In Lamar Homes, Inc. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co., 242 S.W.3d
1, 13 ( Tex. 2007) , the Texas Supreme Court observed:
Contrary to the carrier’s contentions, the CGL policy makes no
distinction between tort and contract damages. The insuring agreement
does not mention torts, contracts, or economic losses; nor do these terms
appear in the definitions of “property damage” or “occurrence.” The
CGL’s insuring agreement simply asks whether “property damage” has
been caused by an “occurrence.” Therefore, any preconceived notion
that a CGL policy is only for tort liability must yield to the policy’s
actual language. The duty to defend must be determined here, as in other
insurance cases, by comparing the complaint’s factual allegations to the
policy’s actual language.
Id. at 13, citing 2 JEFFREY W. STEMPEL, LAW OF INSURANCE
CONTRACT DISPUTES §14.02[ d][1] at 14A-10 (2d ed. 1999)  (“The
language of the CGL policy and the purpose of the CGL insuring agreement
will provide coverage for claims sounding in part in breach-of-
contract/breach-of-warranty under some circumstances.”); See also 9
COUCH ON INSURANCE §126:3 at 126-8 (3d ed.1997)  (“the legal theory
asserted by the claimant is immaterial to the determination of whether the
risk is covered”).
With that background in mind, the following is a discussion of the
individual business risk exclusions.
Exclusion j.—Damage to PropertyExclusion j. states: This insurance does not apply to:
“Property damage” to:
(1)    Property you own, rent, or occupy, including any costs or
expenses incurred by you, or any other person, organization or
entity, for repair, replacement, enhancement, restoration or
maintenance of such property for any reason, including
prevention of injury to a person or damage to another’s property;
(2)    Premises you sell, give away or abandon, if the “property
damage” arises out of any part of those premises;
(3)    Property loaned to you;
(4)    Personal property in the care, custody or control of the insured;
(5)    That particular part of real property on which you or any
contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on
your behalf are performing operations, if the “property damage”
arises out of those operations; or
(6)    That particular part of any property that must be restored,
repaired or replaced because “your work” was incorrectly
performed on it.
Paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) of this exclusion do n ot apply to
“property damage” (other than damage by fire) to premises,
including the contents of such premises, rented to you for a
period of  7 or fewer consecutive days. A separate limit of
insurance applies to Damage to Premises Rented To You as
described in Section III – Limits of Insurance.
Paragraph (2) of this exclusion does not apply if the premises are
“your work” and were never occupied, rented or held for rental
by you.Paragraph (3), (4), (5), and (6) of this exclusion do n ot apply to
liability assumed under a sidetrack agreement.
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to “property
damage” included in the “products-completed ope rations
hazard”.
Exclusion j. generally reinforces the need of the insured to maintain its
own premises and personal property in good condition and use reasonable
care to prevent damage or injury. The first four paragraphs of exclusion j.
apply to the insured’s real or personal property. The last two paragraphs of
exclusion j. apply to a contractor’s business risks.
The exclusions set forth in j.(1) through (4) have three general objectives.
First, they are intended to prevent CGL insurance from providing property
insurance coverage that is available under other types of insurance coverage
such as first-party property or fire and casualty policies. Secondly, they seek
to avoid having the policy essentially operate as a guarantor of the insured’s
property by excluding liability when the only damage results from the
property itself. Third, they are designed to prevent an insured from obtaining
insurer-funded improvement of its own property as a byproduct of having
incurred liability to third parties.
The exclusions encompassed in paragraph j. have undergone
modifications over the years. The current version is a combination of the
care, custody, or control and alienated premises exclusions contained in the
1973 CGL policy and various exclusions contained in the broad form
property damage endorsement commonly included with the 1973 pol icy form.
That endorsement was eventually written into the standard CGL policy in
1986. Additional modifications to the subparts of exclusion j. are noted
below.
Exclusion j.(1)
Exclusion j.(1) is commonly referred to as the “owned property”
exclusion. It excludes claims for property damage to the named insured’s
building or real estate that it owns or rents. In 1998, an exception was addedto this exclusion that states that the exclusion does not apply “to premises
rented to the named insured for seven or fewer consecutive days or to its
contents.” For example, this exception would permit coverage for “property
damage” to hotel room furnishings or to conference facilities rented by the
insured on a short–term (seven days or less) basis, provided that such
“property damage” was caused by an “occurrence” or accident.
Exclusion j.(1) was enhanced in 2001 to state that this insurance does not
apply to “property damage” to property you own, rent, or occupy, including
any costs or expenses incurred by you, or any other person, organization
or entity, for repair, replacement, enhanc ement, restoration or
maintenanc e of such property for any reason, including prevention of
injury to a person or damage to another’s property.” The significance of
this is addressed below.
This exclusion has been most extensively litigated in environmental
insurance coverage cases. Typically, environmental contamination is
discovered within the boundaries of the named insured’s property, including
the groundwater beneath the property. Setting aside the pollution exclusion
and its potential applicability, many courts have held that exclusion j.(1)
does not bar coverage for costs associated with complying with government-
ordered cleanup of the groundwater contamination because, according to
state law, it is the state, not the individual property owner, that owns the
groundwater beneath the property. Thus, since the groundwater is not owned
by the named insured, the groundwater would qualify as “property damage”
to third party property. The United States District Court for the Western
District of Wisconsin adopted this view in Maryland Cas. Co. v. Wausau
Chemical Corp., 809 F.Supp 680 (1992) . See also Martin v. State Farm
Fire & Cas. Co., 146 O re. App. 270 ( Or. Ct. App. 1997) .
The enhancement made to the exclusion in 2001 was designed to clarify
that prophylactic measures taken to prevent third party property damage are
also encompassed within the scope of the “your property” exclusion—
irrespective of whether the threat of “property damage” to third party
property is “imminent” or “immediate.” Previously, some courts interpreting
exclusion j.(1) had refused to exclude coverage for the cost of pollution
cleanup on a policyholder’s own property when the cleanup was alleged tobe necessary to prevent the migration of pollutants into groundwater or onto
adjacent third-party property. These courts reasoned that if coverage is only
triggered when waste seeps onto third-party property, this creates an
incentive for the insured to delay cleanup until it affects third-party property.
This view was embraced by the courts in Savoy Med. Supply Co., Inc. v. F
& H Mfg. Corp., 776 F.Supp. 703, 708 (E.D.N.Y. 1991) , and Claussen v.
Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 754 F.Supp. 1576, 1580 (S.D. Ga. 1990) : (“[e]ven if
the pollution had not yet damaged the surrounding land and water, the
imminent threat justified cleaning up the site to prevent damage to the
surroundings”). Rulings such as these should no longer occur under the
enhanced version of the exclusion.
Exclusion j.(2)
Exclusion j.(2) is commonly referred to as the “alienated premises”
exclusion. The alienated premises exclusion narrows the scope of the CGL
policy to exclude coverage for “property damage” to premises that the named
insured has sold, given away or abandoned, if the “property damage” arises
out of any part of those premises. The intent of this exclusion is to preclude
coverage for liability that is based on the obligation of a seller of a building
or other premises to identify and correct defects in the premises. For
example, assume the insured sold a building with defective wiring. If the
building subsequently catches fire as a result of the defective wiring and the
insured is sued by the new homeowner for the fire loss, the claim against the
insured would be barred by the alienated premises exclusion.
There is an exception to this exclusion that states that the exclusion does
not apply if the premises are “your work” and were never occupied, rented,
or held for rental by you. This exception restores coverage for contractors
who never occupied the premises, but whose “work” it was to construct the
premises. In other words, in the example cited above , if it was a contractor’s
faulty wiring during the construction of the building that caused the premises
to catch fire, the alienated premises exclusion would not apply if the
contractor had never occupied the building.Fejes v. Alaska Ins. Co., 984 P.2d 519 (Alaska 1999) , provides an
example of a fact pattern where the court addressed the alienated premises
exclusion and its exception. In that case, a contractor was sued by a
homeowner when an improperly constructed curtain drain failed and caused
a septic system to stop functioning. The insurer denied coverage based, in
part, on the alienated premises exclusion. The insured argued that the
alienated premises exclusion is limited to cases where the premises was first
occupied, rented or held for rental by the insured and was not intended to
apply to the completed ope rations of a contractor. The court agreed. Thus, the
alienated premises exclusion did not preclude coverage for the negligence
claims against the contractor.
Courts have broadly construed exclusion j.(2) to include any form of
occupied housing, even if for a profit. In Genesis Ins. Co. v. BRE Props., 916
F. Supp. 2d 1058 (N.D. Cal. 2013) , BRE bought and rented an apartment
complex, which it then sold. BRE argued that since they were in the business
of selling apartment complexes, they should not be considered as occupying a
complex they intended to sell. The court disagreed, and stated that since they
rented it out for any length of time, the exclusion applied.
Exclusions j.(3) and (4)
Exclusion j.(3) excludes coverage for property loaned to the named
insured. Exclusion j.(4) is known as the “care, custody, or control” exclusion
and precludes coverage for personal property in the care, custody or control
of any person qualifying as an insured under the terms of the policy.
The purpose of exclusions j.(3) and (4) is to prevent the CGL policy from
being tantamount to property insurance when property is in the hands of a
bailee or lessee, or is otherwise in the custody and control of the insured and
thereby subject to damage or loss due to the insured’s acts or omissions.
In 1998, along with exclusion j.(1), both exclusions j.(3) and (4) were
revised to preserve coverage for “property damage” to premises, including
the contents of such premises, rented to you [the named insured] for a period
of seven or fewer consecutive days.Little case law exists regarding exclusion j.(3), but possession and
control would likely be the main factors a court would consider in deciding
whether property was “loaned” to the named insured at the time that the
“property damage” took place. Those were factors the Supreme Court of
Virginia considered in American Reliance Insurance Co. v. Mitchell, 385
S.E.2d 583 (Va. 1989) , when the court was evaluating whether a truck used
by the insured was “loaned” property. The policy at issue excluded “bodily
injury arising out of the operation of use of any motorized vehicle loaned to
any insured.” A neighbor volunteered his truck to two farmers to help the
farmers load hay. While the farmers were using the truck, a child fell from
the truck and was injured. Suit was brought against the farmers for their
negligence in causing the minor’s injuries. Both farmers had commercial
liability insurance policies with the same insurer. The insurance company
refused to pay the claims for the minor’s injuries, arguing that coverage was
excluded because the truck at issue was a loaned vehicle. The court noted
that the term “loaned” was not defined in the policy and was susceptible to
different interpretations. It could mean a formal bailment or it could be a
loose, informal arrangement, such as where a volunteer has offered the use of
his truck as a friendly gesture for a specific purpose, never relinquishing
possession or control over the vehicle. Adopting the interpretation most
favorable to the insured, the court held that the term would be construed as a
formal bailment. As the insurer did not establish that the owner of the vehicle
had relinquished possession or control over the vehicle, the court refused to
apply the exclusion to preclude coverage.
Whether damaged property was in the “care, custody, or control” of the
insured has been the subject of much controversy. In resolving this issue,
courts have generally considered one or more of the following factors to
determine if the insured exercised sufficient control over the property to
bring the claim within the scope of the exclusion:
•    the role of the insured in supervising and protecting the damaged
property at issue;
•    whether the insured’s control was exclusive;
•    whether the damaged property was merely incidental to the insured’s
work; and•    the amount of time which elapsed between the insured’s
relinquishment of control over the property and the property damage.
Illinois courts apply a two-part test to determine if property is within the
care, custody or control of the insured and thus excluded from coverage.
First, the insured must have possessory control of the property at the time of
the loss; intimate handling of the product is not a prerequisite to establishing
possessory control. Second, the property must be a necessary element of the
work performed. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Zurich Ins. Co., 402 Ill. App. 3d
37 (Ill. App. Ct. 1st Dist. 2010) . The control exercised by the insured must
be exclusive, but it need not be continuous. If the insured has possessory
control at the time the property is damaged, the exclusion will apply.
Country Mutual Ins. Co. v. Waldman Mercantile Co., Inc., 103
Ill.App.3d 39, 43, 430 N.E.2d 606, 610 (5th Dist. 1981) , is illustrative of a
case applying the “care, custody and control” exclusion. The insured in
Waldman was a discount store. Its policy excluded “property in the care
custody or control of the insured or as to which the insured is for any purpose
exercising physical control.” The insured leased space in the store to various
lessees, who displayed their merchandise within the leased space. The
lessees’ merchandise was shipped to the store by either their own employees
or a commercial carrier. The lessees were responsible for maintaining their
own displays and shelves and their employees came to the store about once
or twice a week during regular business hours to check and restock the
merchandise. The insured charged the third party lessees a percentage of
their sales as compensation for its services. The insured was the only
business that had keys to the premises. It was responsible for cleaning and
maintaining the building and the surrounding area and providing security
services. A fire broke out in the store, which destroyed the building and the
merchandise located therein. The destroyed merchandise included that which
was owned by the lessees.
The Illinois appellate court found that the policy’s “care custody or
control” exclusion precluded coverage for the claims by the lessees against
the discount store owner. The court noted that the fire that destroyed the
lessees’ property occurred while the insured’s employees were, for all
practical purposes, in full charge of the property. The court also found itsignificant that only the insured’s personnel had access to the merchandise at
all times. The court was unpersuaded by the insured’s argument that the
exclusion should not apply on grounds that the insured did not have
“exclusive control” since the lessees’ employees were responsible for taking
inventory and restocking the merchandise. The court found the term “limited
access” more aptly applied to the lessees, who could only access the product
during regular business hours. The court found that such access to the
merchandise did not amount to “limited access” on the part of the insured.
Accordingly, the court found the exclusion applied since the insured had
exclusive possessory control at the time of the loss. The court in Cashmere
Pioneer Growers, Inc. v. Unigard Sec. Ins. Co., 77 Wash. App. 436, 439,
891 P.2d 732, 734 (1995) , similarly found that the care, custody, or control
exclusion barred coverage for “property damage” claimed by the owner of
apples stored at the insured’s atmosphere controlled storage facility after
apples were damaged and deemed unfit due to freezing.
In Acadia Ins. Co. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 679 F. Supp. 2d 229 (D. Mass.
2010) , a contractor was storing doors in the home of the woman who hired
the contractor to do renovation work. The woman, though never excluded
completely from the home, moved out while the work was being completed
as all her utilities were turned off. Thus, her home was effectively in the care
and custody of the contractor. During this time, the windows were damaged
from excessive moisture. The contractor argued that exclusion j.(4) should
not preclude coverage for the doors. The court disagreed. Even though the
doors were not technically in exclusive control of the contractor (since the
homeowner was never officially excluded from the house), it was clear that
the contractor effectively exercised exclusive possession of the doors during
the time of the damage.
On the other hand, the court in Crane Serv. & Equip. Corp. v. United
States Fid. & Guar. Co., 496 N.E.2d 833 (Mass. App. 1986) , refused to
apply an exclusion for property “rented to,” “used by” or in the “care,
custody or control” of the insured, where a crane used by the insured was
damaged. The crane owner had furnished the insured, a general contractor,
with a truck crane, an oiler who drove the crane, and an operator who
operated the levers to make lifts. Although operating under the insured’s
supervision, the crane owner’s employees had retained physical control andresponsibility over the crane at all times. When an accident occurred that
damaged the crane, the crane owner sued the general contractor who, in turn,
tendered its defense to its insurance carrier. The insurer denied coverage to
the insured based on an exclusion for property “rented to,” “used by” or in
the “care, custody or control” of the insured. The court disagreed that the
exclusion precluded coverage. The court viewed the transaction as involving
a service contract as oppos ed to an equipment lease. Noting that courts look
to who has possession and who has control of the property versus a mere
reference to a contractual arrangement of a “lease” or “rental,” the court
concluded that the damage to the crane rented to the general contractor fell
outside the scope of the exclusion.
Exclusion j.(5)
Exclusion j.(5) applies to a contractor’s business risks. It is commonly
referred to as the “performing operations” exclusion. Because this exclusion
applies to faulty workmanship, it is often addressed in tandem with the
“occurrence” issue. The “performing operations” exclusion precludes
recovery for “property damage” to that particular part of real property on
which you [the named insured] or any contractors or subcontractors working
directly or indirectly on your behalf are performing operations, if the
“property damage” arises out of those operations. There are three
requirements for this exclusion to apply: 1) there must be “property damage”
to a particular part of real property (as oppos ed to personal property), 2) the
“property damage” must occur during ongoing work, and 3) the “property
damage” must arise out of those operations or work.
The CGL policy form does not define “that particular part,” and so there
exists controversy as to the meaning of that phrase. The Wisconsin Court of
Appeals in Acuity v. Soc iety Ins., 2012 WI APP 13, 810 N.W.2d 812 (2012) ,
held that the phrase “that particular part” applies only to those parts of a
building on which the defective work was performed, which is determined
based on the scope of the construction agreement. Accord, Gore Design
Completions, Ltd. v. Hartford Fire Ins., 538 F .3d 365 ( 5th Cir. 2008)  (where
contract to install entertainment center in airplane, damage to other aspects of
the plane, including loss of use, were not excluded). Other courts have heldthat “the particular part of the property must have been the subject of the
incorrectly performed ‘work’ to be subject to exclusions j.(5) and j.(6). See
Mid-Continent Cas. Co. v. JHP Dev., Inc., 557 F3d 207 (5th Cir. 2009)
(applying Texas law); Fortney v. Weygandt , Inc. v. Am. Mfrs. Mut. Ins. Co.,
595 F .3d 308, 31 1 (6th Cir. 2010)  (applying Ohio law).
Irrespective of whether the exclusion is read with reference to the scope
of the construction contract, courts have uniformly held that the exclusion
should be applied narrowly. For example, in Columbia Mutual Insurance
Co. v. Schauf, 967 S.W.2d 74 (Mo. 1998) , the insured, a contractor, had been
painting kitchen cabinets in a homeowner’s house. While he was cleaning his
equipment, the pump generator used for applying the paint started a fire that
caused extensive damage throughout the house. Giving a narrow construction
to “that particular part of real property” on which the insured was performing
operations, the court held that exclusion j.(5) precluded coverage solely for
damage to the cabinets but not for the damage to the remainder of the house.
The court in Roaring Lion, LLC v. Nautilus Ins. Co., 2011 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 100666 (D. Mont. July 15, 2011), reached a similar conclusion. A
subcontractor negligently poured a foundation, which harmed the foundation
as well as the frame. The question turned on whether exclusion j (5)
excluded both the damage to the foundation and the frame, or just the
foundation. The court found that the exclusion only applied to the foundation
as “that particular part of real property.”
The insured’s efforts at obtaining an overly narrow reading of exclusion
j.(5), however, were not successful in Jet Line Services Inc. v. American
Employers Ins. Co., 404 Mass. 706, 537 N.E.2d 107 (1989) . In that case, the
insured was hired to clean and repair a large petroleum tank. While the
insured’s employees were working on the bottom of the tank, it exploded.
The tank owners sued the insured, alleging that the insured negligently caused
the explosion. The insured sought a defense from its insurer. The insurer
denied coverage based on exclusion j.(5). The Massachusetts Supreme Court
concluded that this exclusion applied to all of the damages to the tank
resulting from the tank explosion even though the insured’s employees were
working only on the bottom of the tank when the explosion occurred.The Supreme Court of North Dakota examined this exclusion in Grinnell
Mut. Reinsurance Co. v. Lynne, 2004 ND 166, 686 N.W.2d 118 (2004) , in a
case that has become a cautionary tale for insurance practitioners. In that
case, the insured, Lynne, contracted with Edward Larson to construct a new
foundation for Larson’s farmhouse. While the house was lifted, it fell off the
support jacks and into the basement approximately three feet. Larson sued the
contractor, Lynne, for the expenses incurred in connection with the removal
and replacement of the house.
The court held that the claims against the contractor fell squarely within
exclusion j.(5). The court held that reasonable persons could not disagree
that at the time of the loss: 1) Lynne was performing operations, 2) on real
property (owned by Larson), and 3) damage (to the property) arose out of
those operations. Accordingly, the court determined that the damage to the
house resulting from the contractor’s work was not covered. Notably, the
court found that the insured waived any argument that work was directed only
at the basement and foundation, not to the house proper, by failing to offer any
case law or other authority to support that position.
The court in Mid-Continent Cas. Co. v. JHP Dev., Inc., 557 F.3d 207
(5th Cir. Tex. 2009) , examined what it means to be performing “ongoing
work.” A contractor was hired to build five condominium units. After only
one was finished, water damage occurred. The project was halted for the
foreseeable future, or until the already finished unit sold. Since the work had
been stopped for some time, the work was not ongoing. The court stated that
rather than the time between workdays, or a specified period needed to
complete the work, lack of completion alone is not enough to consider the
work ongoing. Therefore the exclusion did not apply.
Exclusion j.(6)
Exclusion j.(6), commonly referred to as the “faulty workmanship”
exclusion, states that the policy does not apply to “property damage” to “that
particular part of any property that must be restored, repaired or replaced
because ‘your work’ was incorrectly performed on it”.This exclusion contains an exception for “property damage” included
within the products-completed operations hazard. The net result is that this
exclusion is only applicable if the work is ongoing at the time the “property
damage” occurs. Exclusion j.(6) does not apply if the work has been
completed. Under the definition of “products-completed operations hazard,”
work will be deemed completed at the earliest of the following times:
a.    W hen all of the work called for in your contract has been completed.
b.    W hen all of the work to be done at the job site has been completed if
your contract calls for work at more than one job site.
c.    W hen that part of the work done at a job site has been put to its
intended use by any person or organization other than another
contractor or subcontractor working on the same project.
The definition further clarifies that “[w]ork that may need service,
maintenance, correction, repair or replacement, but which is otherwise
complete, will be treated as completed.”
Like exclusion j.(5), exclusion j.(6) is also limited to “that particular part
of any property.” The discussion of that issue with respect to j.(5) has equal
application to j.(6).
It can be a fact intensive inquiry as to whether an insured’s work was
still ongoing at the time the “property damage” occurred or was discovered.
The Supreme Court of Missouri in Arnold v. Edelman, 392 S.W.2d 231 (Mo.
1965) , surveyed many decisions on this issue, although it did not specifically
discuss exclusion j.(6). In that case, the insured had contracted to install a
revolving door. The door had been installed, but not adjusted, tested, or
accepted by the owner at the time an accident occurred. The court held that
the job was an incomplete operation and, therefore, did not constitute a
products-completed ope rations hazard.
The court in Farmington Cas. Co. v. Duggan , 417 F.3d 1141 (10th Cir.
2005) , applied the “faulty workmanship” exclusion to preclude coverage for
claims against the insured for the cost of a wall that collapsed. The insured
was hired to do masonry work and to clean the walls with a light acidsolution. It allowed braces to the masonry walls to be removed prematurely
and high winds caused the wall to collapse. The district court refused to
apply exclusion j.(6) on the basis that the policy was ambiguous with respect
to the term “your work” and also because the insured’s work on the building
was “substantially completed.” The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed
on both grounds. The court noted that the Colorado Court of Appeals in
McGowan v. State Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 100 P.3d 521, 526 (Colo. Ct.
App. 2004) , held that a substantially similar products-completed operations
hazard provision was unambiguous and excluded coverage unless all the
work called for in the contract was complete when the damage occurred. As
the insured in the Duggan  case had not yet acid washed the wall, it had not
completed the work called for in its contract at the time the wall collapsed.
Thus, the exclusion applied.
In McGowan, the McGowans contracted with Eagle Summit Construction
Co., Inc. (“Eagle Summit”) to build a house for them. Dissatisfied with the
quality of Eagle Summit’s work, the McGowans terminated their contract
after rough framing was complete and hired another contractor to finish the
project. The McGowans then sued Eagle Summit to recover the costs for
completing their home per the original plans. The trial court awarded the
McGowans approximately $400,000 in damages for the costs of repairs to
correct construction errors and to complete the house according to contract
specifications. Eagle Summit’s insurer denied coverage for the judgment
based on exclusion j.(6).
The Court of Appeals held that the faulty workmanship exclusion clearly
applied to the McGowans’ claim/judgment against Eagle Summit, as they
were seeking to recover the expenditures they were required to make to
repair the damage caused by Eagle Summit’s faulty and incomplete work.
The court held that the “products-completed operations hazard” exception to
the faulty workmanship exclusion was inapplicable. By definition, that
exception applies only to work that is “deemed completed.” Eagle Summit
was terminated after rough framing. Thus, its work was not completed.
In Pekin Ins. Co. v. Willett, 704 N.E.2d 923 (Ill.App.3d 1998) , the
Illinois Appellate Court applied exclusion j.(6) to preclude coverage for the
costs of replacing or repairing a swimming pool. In Pekin, the insured wasuntimely in the performance of painting and maintenance work on a
swimming pool. The pool owner sued the insured, alleging negligence and
breach of contract. The suit sought damages for the repair of the pool, which
had been “pushed out of the ground” as a result of the insured’s failure to
timely complete its maintenance work and fill the pool. The insurer denied
coverage, relying in part on exclusion j.(6). The court agreed with the
insurer’s position. It reasoned that the underlying complaint alleged that the
swimming pool needed to be replaced or repaired because the insured
performed his work incorrectly by failing to fill the pool in a timely manner.
Thus, it found that exclusion j.(6) clearly applied. It also found that exclusion
j.(5) precluded coverage as the underlying complaint alleged that a part of
real property, namely, the swimming pool, was damaged while the insured
was working on it. Compare, American Equity Ins. Co. v. Van Ginhov en,
788 So.2d 388, 391 (Fla. App. 2001) (while damage claim for the pool was
excluded, damages to the other property including the plumbing, electrical,
deck work, and patio were not excluded, as the insured was neither
performing operations on or incorrectly performing work on that other
property).
The Supreme Court of Rhode Island discussed exclusion j.(6) in
Employers Mut. Cas. Co. v. Pires, 723 A.2d 295 (1999) . In Pires, the court
was asked to decide whether the faulty workmanship exclusion should be
held inapplicable because it allegedly contravened the insured’s objectively
reasonable expectations of coverage. Pires had a subcontract with a general
contractor to paint replacement windows and doors that the general
contractor had installed in a home. The general contractor later found
scratches on the windowpanes, which he believed occurred when Pires
sanded the frames. The general contractor later sued Pires for the damage to
the panes. Pires’ insurer refused to defend Pires based on an exclusion in the
policy that stated that the insurance did not apply to “[t]hat particular part of
any property that must be restored, repaired or replaced because ‘your work’
was incorrectly performed on it.” The court decided that the exclusion was
clear and unambiguous and stated that it would apply the exclusion unless
doing so would render “illusory” the coverage provided by the policy. The
court recognized that other courts not only typically enforced such provisions
as written, but ordinarily found that they did not violate an insured’s
objectively reasonable expectations about a policy’s scope of coverage. Thecourt concluded that enforcing the exclusion in the case would not cause the
general liability coverage provisions to become “illusory.” The court,
however, remanded the case to a lower court to determine whether Pires’
work was “incorrectly performed”, or whether Pires had accidentally
damaged the windowpanes when he performed work on the frames. The
court additionally outlined possible outcomes of the case on remand by
stating that:
If Pires performed work on the window panes in connection with
painting the window frames … and he negligently damaged the panes as
part of such a preparation or cleanup operation, then the damage would
fall within the exclusion for incorrectly performed work. If, on the other
hand, Pires did not intentionally perform work on the window panes in
connection with painting the window frames, but only damaged them
accidentally when he was performing work on the frames, then such
damage would not fall within the policy’s exclusion for ‘incorrectly
performed’ work on such property.
Id. at 299.
The court further noted that if Pires’ work caused damage to other
property in addition to the property on which he allegedly “incorrectly
performed work,” the exclusion would not apply to the third-party property.
The court emphasized that even if Pires damaged the panes by incorrectly
performing work on them, excluded damage would only be limited to the cost
of repairing or replacing the damaged panes. This is a similar principle as
what was decided in the Roaring Lions opinion.
Exclusion k.—Damage to “Your Product”
Exclusion k. reads: This insurance does not apply to:
“Property damage” to “your product” arising out of it or any part of it.
The policy provides that “your product” means:a.    Any goods  or products, other than real property, manufactured, sold,
handled, distributed or disposed of by:
(1)    You;
(2)    Others trading under your name; or
(3)    A person or organization whose business or assets you have
acquired; and
b.    C ontainers (other than vehicles), materials, parts or equipment
furnished in connection with such goods  or products.
“Your product” includes:
a.    W arranties or representations made at any time with respect to the
fitness, quality, durability, performance or use of “your product”; and
b.    T he providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions.
“Your product” does not include vending machines or other property
rented to or located for the use of others but not sold.
The 1973 CGL policy provided that coverage did not apply “to property
damage to the named insured’s products arising out of such products or any
part of such products.” In 1986, the exclusion was revised to its current
wording noted above .
The “your product” exclusion precludes coverage for “property damage”
arising out of a defect in an insured’s product that renders the product useless
or less useful. The court in Fireguard Sprinkler Systems, Inc. v. Scottsdale
Ins. Co., 864 F.2d 648, 654 (9th Cir. 1988), applied this exclusion to exclude
coverage for the costs of upgrading a sprinkler system. The court reasoned
that liability insurance should not be considered a warranty or performance
bond for general contractors controlling their work. However, the exclusion
is not intended to bar coverage for claims arising from the insured’s
products, but for coverage for property damage to the products themselves.
For example, if the insured manufactures a stove that later malfunctions,
catches on fire, and destroys itself, due to exclusion k., the insured would notbe allowed to recover for damage to the stove. Conversely, if the fire
spreads to the counter immediately adjacent to the stove, the damages to the
counter fall outside the terms of the “your product” exclusion and would be
covered.
The “your product” exclusion will not preclude coverage if the insured
product was fundamentally changed into a new product prior to the loss. The
alteration of the insured’s product must be significant. This issue was
addressed in Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. MI Window s & Doors, Inc., 2013
WL 4734045 (Fla. App. 2 Dist. Sept. 4, 2013) . In that case, MI Windows
manufactured windows and doors which it sold to All Seasons to install in
condominiums along the coast of Alabama. In some of the buildings, All
Seasons added a transom to the doors, which made the doors less structurally
sound. In other buildings along the coast, All Seasons installed the doors in
their original form.
Alabama was hit by Hurricane Ivan. The hurricane severely damaged the
buildings in which MI Windows’ doors and windows were installed. The
condo association sued MI Windows. The issue raised in the declaratory
judgment action was whether the doors which were altered by All Seasons
still qualified as “your product”, i.e., MI Windows’ product.
The Appellate Court determined that the “your product” exclusion
applied to the doors. The court found that an alteration to the product must be
so significant that it fundamentally transformed the insured’s product into a
completely new product. The court compared this case to Imperial Casualty
& Indem. Co. v. High Concrete Structures, Inc., 858 F.2d 128 (3d Cir. Pa.
1988) . In Imperial, the insured sold sheet metal which was then stamped into
individual washers. The court found that the washers were a new product.
Comparatively, the MI Window s court found that the addition of the transom
was too ordinary an addition to fundamentally turn the door into a new
product.
In Valmont Energy Steel, Inc. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 359 F.3d
770 (2004), the Fifth Circuit held that the “your product” exclusion
unambiguously barred coverage for claims against the insured for damages
arising out of the failure of the insured’s steel flanges to meet contract
specifications, and the insured’s misrepresentations that such flanges were incompliance with the specifications. In that case, Valmont Energy purchased
steel flanges from Continental Manufacturing for the construction of
microwave towers. Before installing the flanges, Valmont tested the flanges
and discovered they did not meet specifications. It sued and obtained
damages from Continental for breach of contract. Continental then went
bankrupt. Valmont, as a judgment creditor, sought coverage from
Continental’s insurers. They denied coverage on the basis that the damages
sought were not for “property damage” caused by an “occurrence” and that
the “your product” exclusion precluded coverage in any event.
As to the “your product” exclusion, Valmont argued that it was ambiguous
when read in conjunction with the policy provisions regarding the limits of
insurance for “products-completed operations.” Specifically, Valmont
maintained that while the “your product” exclusion appeared to preclude
coverage, the “products completed operations hazard” as described in the
limits of liability provision appeared to extend coverage as long as the
“property damage” arose out of the insured’s product and occurred off the
insured’s premises and not while the insured had physical possession of its
product.
The Fifth Circuit disagreed. It held that there was no ambiguity because
the limits of insurance provision could not be construed as a grant of
coverage for “products-completed operations hazard.” Rather, it only
delineated the amounts that the insurer would pay for such claims.
Accordingly, the limits of insurance provision did not conflict with the “your
product” exclusion and the exclusion would be enforced.
Numerous other courts have applied the “your product” exclusion where
the only property damage was to the insured’s own product. See, e.g.,
Microvote Corp. v. GRE Ins. Group, 779 N.E2d 94 (Ind. Ct. App. 2002)
(cost of malfunctioning voting machines excluded by the “your product”
exclusion); National Clothing Co. v. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co., 135 Wash.
App. 578 (Wash. App. 2006)  (the insured’s cost of reimbursing Costco for
the purchase price, lost profits and other costs arising from the insured’s sale
of counterfeit goods  is excluded by the “your product” exclusion); Hartog
Rahal P’ship v. American Motorists Ins. Co., 359 F.Supp. 2d 331 (S.D.N.Y.
2005)  (where insured incorporated artificially sweetened juice into aconcentrate used in products that were suppos ed to be 100%  pure juice, the
cost of replacing the insured’s product fell within the “your product”
exclusion); Standar d Venetian Blind Co. v. Am. Empire Ins. Co., 469 A.2d
563 (Pa. 1983)  (coverage excluded by “your product” exclusion where
portico manufactured by insured collapsed and purchaser sought
reimbursement for the costs of replacing the portico, repairing items stored
beneath the portico and labor needed to remove the collapsed structure).
In contrast, where the insured’s product causes property damage to third
party property, the exclusion will not bar coverage for the third party
property damage. That was the case in Armstrong World Indus ., Inc. v. Aetna
Cas. & Sur. Co., 45 Cal.App.4t h 1 (Cal. App. 1996). The insured’s asbestos-
containing products were installed in various buildings. After the asbestos
was discovered, the building owners sued the insured for the cost of the
asbestos removal and repair of the building. The court rejected the
application of the “your product” exclusion to the suit brought against the
insured because it held that the claims involved property damage to the
buildings as a result of the insured’s product, not merely damages due to the
asbestos products themselves.
The definition of “your product” indicates that products do not include
real property. This clarification dispels the notion that a building completed
by a general contractor is the product of the general contractor, such that any
defect in the building would be excluded from coverage by the “your
product” exclusion. This issue was addressed in Scottsdale Ins. Co. v. Tri-
State Ins. Co. of Minnesota, 302 F.Supp.2d 1100 (D. ND 2004) . In that case
the definition of “your product” included the exception for “real property.”
The insured, Commercial Group West (“CWG”), manufactured and erected
modular buildings. Each unit was custom designed and completed floor to
ceiling. Each unit was then encased in reinforced plastic and transported to a
construction site for assembly on a foundation prepared by the insured. Once
assembled on site, the protective covering was removed and the roof was
built over the resulting structure.
CWG contracted to construct modular units and transport them to a site to
be assembled to form a motel. After the modules were on site and were
affixed to the foundation, a severe rainstorm caused the plastic covering oncertain of the unroofed modular units to rupture and each sustained
substantial damage. CWG’s insurer denied coverage on the basis that the
claim was excluded by the “your product” exclusion.
In the declaratory judgment action, the federal district court determined
that, based on North Dakota law, the modular units were part of real property
once they became affixed to the land. As the modules were attached to the
foundation at the time the units sustained water damage, the modules no
longer fell within the definition of “your product.” Hence, the “your product”
exclusion did not preclude coverage.
A similar exclusion of real property was extended to housing materials in
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. American Building Materials, Inc., 820 F.Supp.2d
1265, 1272 ( M.D.Fla. 201 1). In that case, the issue was whether drywall was
“your product” once it was installed in a home. The court found that, under
Florida law, drywall became real property once it was installed and
therefore the “your product” exclusion did not apply.
Exclusion l.—Damage to “Your Work”
Exclusion l. provides:
This insurance does not apply to:
“Property damage” to “your work” arising out of it or any part of it and
included in the “products-completed ope rations hazard.” This
exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the work out of
which the damage arises was performed on your behalf by a
subcontractor.
“Your work” and “products-completed ope rations hazard” are defined as
follows:
“Your Work” means:
a.    W ork or operations performed by you or on your behalf; and
b.    M aterials, parts or equipment furnished in connection with such work
or operations.
“Your work” includes:a.    W arranties or representations made at any time with respect to the
fitness, quality, durability, performance or use of “your work”; and
b.    T he providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions.
“Products-completed ope rations hazard”:
a.    Includes all “bodily injury” and “property damage” occurring away
from premises you own or rent and arising out of “your product” or
“your work” except:
(1)    Products that are still in your physical possession; or
(2)    Work that has not yet been completed or abandoned. However,
“your work” will be deemed completed at the earliest of the
following times:
(a)    W hen all of the work called for in your contract has been
completed.
(b)    W hen all of the work to be done at the job site has been
completed if your contract calls for work at more than one
job site.
(c)    W hen that part of the work to be done at the job site has
been put to its intended use by any person or organization
other than another contractor or subcontractor working on
the same project.
Work that may need service, maintenance, correction, repair or replacement,
but which is otherwise complete, will be treated as completed.
b.    D oes not include “bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of:
(1)    The transportation of property, unless the injury or damage
arises out of a condition in or on a vehicle not owned or
operated by you, and that condition was created by the “loading
or unloading” of that vehicle by any insured;(2)    The existence of tools, uninstalled equipment or abandoned or
unused materials; or
(3)    Products or operations for which the classification, listed in the
Declarations or in a policy schedule operations are subject to the
General Aggregate Limit.
In 1973, the “your work” exclusion was much broader in scope than the
current version. The exclusion in effect in 1973 barred coverage for work
performed by the named insured as well as by its subcontractors. Since 1986,
however, the CGL policy form specifically provides that the “your work”
exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the work out of which the
damage arises was performed on the named insured’s behalf by a
subcontractor. Post1986, there have been no other substantive changes to this
exclusion.
The “your work” exclusion precludes coverage for “property damage” to
“your work” arising out of it or any part of it. “Your work” refers exclusively
to the named insured’s work, materials used in conjunction therewith and
warranties given by the named insured. Courts often address the “your work”
exclusion in tandem with the “occurrence” issue in addressing whether
“property damage” resulting from faulty workmanship is covered. As
discussed in the “occurrence” section, the subcontractor exception set forth
in exclusion l. is frequently cited as a significant factor in the court’s analysis
of whether faulty workmanship can constitute an “occurrence.”
The “your work” exclusion requires that the “property damage” be
included in the “products-completed operations hazard.” In other words, the
named insured’s work must be completed or this exclusion is not applicable.
If the named insured becomes liable for “property damage” to its work
before operations are completed, one or more subparts to exclusion j. may
apply to the claim. For example, if the insured’s faulty electrical work causes
the building to burn before completion, paragraphs (5) and (6) of exclusion j.
would bar coverage for the faulty electrical work. The justification for
requiring a completed operation before exclusion l. is applied involves the
notion that while the insured is performing its work, the insured can control
the quality of the work done in order to prevent damage. See, 2 Allan D.
Windt, Insurance Claims & Disputes: Representation of Insurance Companiesand Insureds, §11.10 (6th ed. 2008 and Supp. 2014) . Exclusion l. is aimed at
forcing the insured to internalize the costs of unsatisfactory operations.
The Texas Supreme Court addressed exclusion l. in Pine Oak Builders,
Inc. v. Great American Lloyds Ins. Co., 279 S.W.3d 650 (Tex. 2009)  in the
context of a duty to defend. Pine Oak was a home builder. In one of four suits
that had been filed against Pine Oak, the petition sought recovery for damage
due to improper design and construction of columns and a balcony. The
petition contained claims for breach of contract and warranty, violation of the
Residential Construction Liability Act, and negligence based on Pine Oak’s
alleged failure to perform its work in a good and workmanlike manner and
failure to make requested repairs. There were no allegations of defective
work by a subcontractor. There were also no allegations of property damage
to property other than that upon which Pine Oak had worked. The court,
refusing to consider extrinsic evidence, held that the claims fell within the
“your work” exclusion. Accordingly, it found that the insurer owed no duty to
defend Pine Oak.
The “your work” exclusion only negates coverage if the only property
damaged is that upon which the named insured worked. If some other
property is damaged, the exclusion will not preclude coverage for that third
party’s property damage. Thus if a claim involves damages for both the
named insured’s repair or replacement of faulty workmanship and physical
injury caused by the insured’s work to another’s property, coverage will
exist for the latter damages, but not for the former.
The subcontractor exception was addressed by the court in Architex
Ass’n v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 27 So. 3d 1148 (Miss. 2010) . A real estate
company contracted with the general contractor, Architex, to build a hotel.
Architex contracted with subcontractors to work on the construction. The real
estate company had an issue with the structure of the hotel’s foundation. The
real estate company sued Architex based on the faulty workmanship of one of
Architex’s subcontractors. Architex then turned to its insurer for coverage. Its
insurer denied coverage relying on the “your work” exclusion. The Supreme
Court of Mississippi determined that the faulty work of the subcontractor was
an unexpected occurrence which triggered coverage. The court concluded
that while there would be no coverage under the policy for work performedby Architex itself, any of the alleged defective work that had been performed
by subcontractors would not fall within the terms of the exclusion.
The court in Pulte Home Corp. v. Fidelity & Guar. Ins. Co., 2004 WL
516216 (Va. Cir. Ct. Feb. 6, 2004), addressed the “your work” exclusion in
the context of an additional insured’s claim for coverage. In that case, Pulte
Home Corp. (“Pulte”), a large homebuilder, was sued in numerous lawsuits
along with the subcontractor it retained to install allegedly defective Exterior
Insulation Finish Systems (“EIFS”). Pulte qualified as an additional insured
under the insurance policy issued to its subcontractor. It sought
reimbursement of its defense costs and settlement sums from the
subcontractor’s insurers. They denied coverage for that portion of the
damages allocated to the repair and replacement of the EIFS on the basis
that: 1) there is no indemnity coverage for repair or replacement of the
named insured’s own work under the “your work” exclusion, and 2)
defective workmanship is not an “occurrence” under the terms of the
contract.
The court found the “your work” exclusion to be unambiguous. It held that
the exclusion clearly excluded indemnity for repair or replacement of “your
work” by the named insured. The court held that the exclusion extended to
Pulte as the additional insured under its subcontractor’s policy since the
subcontractor was the entity that did the work. Thus the “property damage”
was to the named insured’s work. In addition, the court agreed that defective
workmanship was not an “occurrence.”
Interestingly, while the “your work” exclusion precluded coverage for
damages allocated to the EIFS installation under the subcontractor’s policy,
such damages would not have been precluded by the “your work” exclusion
in Pulte’s own policy. That is because the subcontractor actually performed
the work. As mentioned previously, the “your work” exclusion is not
applicable to work performed on behalf of the named insured by a
subcontractor.
One issue that might arise in the construction of the “your work”
exclusion is whether an entity qualifies as a “subcontractor” for the purposes
of the subcontractor exclusion. In Wanzek Constr., Inc. v. Emplrs. Ins., 679
N.W.2d 322 (Minn. 2004) , a general contractor used a specific manufacturerto provide coping stones for the construction of a public pool. The stones
cracked and caused injury to patrons of the pool. The insurer refused to
cover the repairs to the pool for the general contractor citing the “your work”
exclusion. The general contractor argued that the stone manufacturer was not
a subcontractor, and therefore, the “your work” exclusion did not bar
coverage. The district court agreed, finding that a subcontractor is one who
installs the product, not one who merely provides it. The Minnesota Supreme
Court let the policy language decide. It found the policy language to be
ambiguous. The court held that the stone manufacturer was a subcontractor
for purposes of the policy as the contract between the stone manufacturer and
the general contractor required the stone manufacturer to furnish and pay for
all supervision, labor, and materials necessary or required to fully prepare,
design, fabricate, treat and deliver the coping stones. As such, the stone
manufacturer performed work as a subcontractor, thereby implicating the
exception to the “your work” exclusion. Accordingly, the insurer could not
rely on the “your work” exclusion to preclude coverage.
Exclusion m.—Damage to Impaired Property or Property
Not Physically Injured
Exclusion m. states:
This insurance does not apply to:
“Property damage” to “impaired property” or property that has not been
physically injured, arising out of:
(1)    A defect, deficiency, inadequacy, or dangerous condition in “your
product” or “your work”; or
(2)    A delay or failure by you or anyone acting on your behalf to perform
a contract or agreement in accordance with its terms.
This exclusion does not apply to the loss of use of other property arising out
of sudden and accidental physical injury to “your product” or “your work”
after it has been put to its intended use.
The policy definitions of “your product” and “your work” were provided
earlier in this section, in connection with exclusion k. and exclusion l.,respectively. As introduced in 1986, the term “impaired property” is defined
as follows:
“Impaired Property” means tangible property, other than “your product” or
“your work”, that cannot be used or is less useful because:
1.    I t incorporates “your product” or “your work” that is known or
thought to be defective, deficient, inadequate or dangerous; or
2.    You have failed to fulfill the terms of a contract or agreement; if such
property can be restored to use by:
a.    The repair, replacement, adjustment, or removal of “your
product” or “your work”; or
b.    Your fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement.
The “impaired property” exclusion was first included in CGL policies in
1966 and was later refined in 1973, 1986, and 1990. The 1973 version of the
exclusion applied only to the loss of use of tangible property not physically
injured, while the current version applies to property damage to “impaired
property” or to property that has not been physically injured.
The court in Hamlin Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indem. Co., 86 F.3d 93
(7th Cir. 1996) , provided an explanation of “impaired property.” In that case,
the insured manufactured liquid crystal displays (“LCDs”) that were
incorporated into agricultural machinery. Defects in the LCDs caused the
instrument panels on the machinery to work improperly. The court analogized
the defect in the LCDs to a malfunctioning clock in an automobile and stated
that while such a malfunction would impair the performance of the
automobile, it does not physically injure the automobile.
The court in Pinkerton & Laws, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of America, 227
F.Supp.2d 1348, 1354 (N.D. Ga. 2004) , provided a succinct statement about
the purpose and requirements of exclusion m.:
This exclusion is commonly called the “impaired property” exclusion
and is included in a policy to prevent the insured from claiming
economic losses resulting from the insured’s work or work product.Florida courts have outlined three rules regarding the applicability of
exclusions such as exclusion m. The first rule is that if the complaint
fails to allege injury to other property, and merely alleges economic
loss resulting from injury to the product itself, the exclusion applies,
thus precluding coverage. The second rule is that if the complaint
alleges or otherwise establishes damage to other property, the exclusion
will not apply. The third rule is that the exclusion does not apply to
situations arising from a sudden and accidental injury to the product,
which results in economic loss.
The first rule articulated in the Pinkerton decision is exemplified by
Transcontinental Ins. Co. v. Ice Systems of America, 847 F. Supp. 947
(M.D. Fla. 1994) . In that case, the Tampa Bay National Hockey Group
contracted with Ice Systems to set up a portable rink suitable for ice hockey.
The Hockey Group scheduled an exhibition game for its team to be played in
the rink, but the ice on the rink never froze properly. The game had to be
cancelled, and the Hockey Group sued Ice Systems for recovery of damages
in the form of lost business. Ice Systems tendered its defense to its CGL
insurer. The insurer denied coverage based on exclusion m. The insured
argued that the loss fell within the exception to exclusion m. The court
rejected the insured’s argument, noting that the exception to exclusion m was
not applicable because there was no sudden and accidental injury to property
alleged in the complaint. Rather, only purely economic damages were
alleged in the complaint for which no coverage was available.
The impaired property exclusion has been applied in other
circumstances, as well. For example, in Sokol & Co. v. Atlantic Mut. Ins.
Co., 430 F.3d 417, 423 (7th Cir. 2005) , the Seventh Circuit held that the
“impaired property” exclusion applied where the insured’s spoiled peanut
butter - encapsulated in its own self-contained packet - was included in a
cookie mix, and where the cookie mix could be restored to use by simply
removing the insured’s product. Thus, the costs associated with the
replacement of the spoiled peanut butter was excluded. In H.E. Davis &
Sons , Inc. v. N. Pac. Ins. Co., 248 F . Supp. 2d 1079 ( D. Utah 2002) , the court
applied the exclusion to bar coverage for the costs of repairing and re-doing
the insured’s faulty soil compaction on a construction project for a school
district. The school district had to remove and replace concrete footings as aresult of the insured’s inadequate soil compaction. The court found that,
although the concrete footings had to be removed in order to repair the soil
compaction problem, the footings themselves were not damaged.
Accordingly, it held that the impaired property exclusion barred coverage.
In contrast, where the insured’s product is inextricably intertwined with
or incorporated into a finished product, such that it is impossible to remove
the component from the whole, the impaired property exclusion does not
apply. That was the case in Shade  Foods , Inc. v. Innov ative Produc ts Sales
and Marketing, Inc., 78 Cal. App. 4th 847, 93 Cal. Rptr. 2d 364 (2000) ,
where the insured supplied almonds for General Mills’ use in cereal.
General Mills discovered wood splinters after the almonds had been
incorporated into nut clusters, which were composed of congealed syrup and
diced nuts. The nut clusters could not be restored to use by removal of the
wood s plinters. Thus, the impaired property exclusion was not applicable.
The same was true in Harleysville Worcester Ins. Co. v. Paramount
Concrete, Inc., 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43889 (D. Conn. Mar. 31, 2014) . In
the case, the insured made liquid shotcrete which was applied to concrete in
pools. The shotcrete was impure, and its inconsistencies caused the concrete
in the pool to not harden correctly, which caused leaks. The court found that
the liquid concrete could not be removed from the completed pools as it
hardened and became an integral part of the pool walls. Moreover, removal
of the faulty concrete portions did not fix the pools and, therefore, the pools
could not be considered impaired property.
By its terms, the impaired property exclusion does not apply where there
has been physical injury to tangible property. For example, in Potomac Ins.
v. Huang , 2002 WL 418008 (D. Kan. Mar. 1, 2002) , the insured was a
window distributor that sold windows to a general contractor to be installed
in a home. After the windows leaked and damaged the home, the insured
repaired and re-caulked a number of the windows. However, they continued
to leak. The court held that the impaired property exclusion was not
applicable because the home did not qualify as “impaired property.”
Specifically, the home could not be restored to its prior condition simply by
repairing the windows, as the interior of the home had also sustained
physical damage.Citing the business risk doctrine, the Appeals Court of Massachusetts
applied the impaired property exclusion to a claim against a painting
contractor for contamination of the inside of a house by lead-based paint
chips, which occurred when the contractor was hired to scrape old paint off
the house. The owners of the house sued the contractor for recovery of costs
incurred in hiring a clean-up company, vacating the premises, and conducting
tests to check lead levels in family members. The court in Dorchester Mut.
Fire. Ins. Co. v. First Kostas Corp., Inc., 731 N.E.2d 569 (2000) , found that
the contamination of the inside of the house was a “normal, foreseeable, and
expected” business risk in the paint trade that general liability coverage is
not designed to cover. In support, it cited the impaired property exclusion as
well as the overall purposes of the business risk exclusions.
Exclusion n.—Recall of Products, Work or Impaired
Property
Exclusion n. provides:
This insurance does not apply to:
Damages claimed for any loss, cost or expense incurred by you or others for
the loss of use, withdrawal, recall, inspection, repair, replacement,
adjustment, removal or disposal of:
(1)    “Your product”;
(2)    “Your work”; or
(3)    “Impaired property”;
if such product, work or property is withdrawn or recalled from the market
or from use by any person or organization because of a known or suspected
defect, deficiency, inadequacy or dangerous condition in it.
This exclusion was added to the CGL policy in 1966 and was commonly
referred to as the “sistership” exclusion. The exclusion derives its name from
an occurrence in the aircraft industry where one plane crashed and its “sister
ships” were thereafter grounded and recalled by the manufacturer in order to
correct the common defect that had caused the crash. [See, Arcos Corp. v.
American Mutual Liability Ins. Co., 350 F.Supp. 380, 384 n.2(E.D.Pa.1972) , affirmed 485 F.2d 678 (3rd Cir. 1973) .] In 1973, the policy
excluded costs to withdraw the insured’s products from the market. The 1986
exclusion followed the 1973 version with two amendments intended to
strengthen the purpose of the exclusion. One provision expanded the
exclusion to exclude not only the costs of the named insured but also those of
other parties who were involved in the recall of final work or product.
Another provision expanded the exclusion to encompass not only damages
claimed for costs due to recall of the named insured’s product or work, but
also of “impaired property.” Since 1986, there have been no further
substantive revisions made to this exclusion.
Generally, the “sistership exclusion” applies in cases where, because of
the actual failure of the insured’s product, similar or “sister” products that
have not yet failed are withdrawn from use because they are suspected of
containing the same defect. United States Fid. and Guar. Co. v. Wilkin
Insulation C o., 144 Ill.2d 64, 578 N.E.2d 926, 934 (1991) . It does not apply
to the product that has already failed while in use and caused damage to the
property of a third party. Id. Armstrong World Indus ., Inc. v. Aetna Cas. &
Sur. Co., 45 Cal.App.4t h 1, 113, 52 Cal.Rptr.2d 690 (Cal.Ct.App.1996)  (the
“sistership” exclusion operates to exclude coverage for the cost of
‘preventative or curative action’ when the insured withdraws a product in
situations in which a danger is merely apprehended; it does not operate to
exclude coverage for actual damage caused by the very product giving rise to
such an apprehension.”)
The “recall exclusion” as it is currently drafted does not merely exclude
sister products that have not yet failed, but it also excludes the costs of
recalling “impaired property.” In that instance, the product has already failed
but because it can be removed without causing property damage to third-
party property, it is considered “impaired property.” Thus, exclusion n. is
more properly referred to as the “recall exclusion” because it is not limited
to the recall of products that have not yet failed.
“Impaired property” was the property at issue in Sokol and Co. v.
Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co., 430 F.3d 417 (7th Cir. 2005) . In that case, the insured
sold peanut butter packets to its customer for inclusion in boxes of cookie
mix. The customer discovered that the peanut butter had gone rancid andretrieved the cookie mix, substituted fresh peanut butter packets and
demanded reimbursement from the insured of its costs associated with the
replacement. The insured sought coverage under its CGL policy for that
claim. The insurer denied coverage based on exclusion n., among other
policy defenses. The court determined that the peanut butter packets qualified
as “impaired property” since the cookie mix could be restored to use by the
replacement of that product. It found that the recall exclusion squarely
applied to the replacement costs at issue as the recall exclusion applied to
the costs of or expense incurred by the named insured or others for the
withdrawal and replacement of “impaired property.” The court further found
that the recall or replacement was because the peanut butter was rancid,
which constituted a known or suspected “inadequacy.” Id. at 424.
The court in Bright Wood Corporation v. Bankers Standar d Ins. Co, 665
N.W.2d 544 (Minn. Ct. App. 2003) , addressed the “recall” exclusion in a
factual context that demonstrates the magnitude of the damages that can be at
issue for this excluded risk. The insured in that case was Bright Wood, a
manufacturer of wood sash components for windows. In 1996, Scherer
entered into a contract with Bright Wood to supply the wood components that
surround the glass in a window sash. Scherer specified that the wood sash
components had to be treated with a wood preservative to prevent rot. From
October 1996 to November 1997, Bright Wood failed to treat the sash
components sold to Scherer. Unaware of the problem, Scherer continued to
use both treated and untreated components, installing them in between 50,000
and 90,000 s ash units.
In late 1997, Scherer began to receive service requests for windows with
problems with discoloration. After it received additional complaints of
deteriorating or rotting windows, Scherer embarked on a repair program.
Initially, it responded to complaints and replaced visibly defective parts
during field visits. It found that it could not reliably determine which sash
units would rot, and began on-site replacement of all wood sash components
manufactured in 1996 and 1997. During these repairs, the windows showed
no other damage or deterioration except to the Bright Wood components.
However, in order to replace the wood sash components, Scherer technicians
necessarily had to remove weather stripping, hardware, and aluminum
cladding. The windows also had to be refinished. As the scope of theproblem grew, Scherer decided it was more efficient to replace the entire
window with a newly manufactured window; although material costs were
somewhat higher, labor costs were lower. This again meant that window
finishes had to be redone to match. In all the inspections and replacements,
no defect or damage was noted in any part of the windows except to the
wood sash components provided by Bright Wood. The only damage to non-
Bright Wood c omponents occurred during the repair process.
Scherer sued Bright Wood for breach of contract and warranties. Bright
Wood settled the claims for $8.2 million, and then filed suit against its
insurers who had denied coverage based on the “your product” and
“sistership/recall” exclusions. Bright Wood argued that because the repair
and replacement process damaged non-Bright Wood components, neither
exclusion applied.
Preliminarily, the court observed that the damage at issue was based
solely on Bright Wood’s defective product. The incidental damage to the
finish, hardware, and weather-stripping was incurred only in order to make
repairs. As those repairs were deliberately undertaken, the resulting damage
to other property was not caused by an accident or occurrence.
The court then turned to the sistership/recall exclusion. The court stated:
“The theory of the sistership exclusion, which excludes coverage when
a product is withdrawn, recalled, or replaced because of a known or
suspected defect discovered in a similar product, is that the insurer
should not be saddled with the cost of preventing such defects or failure
any more than it was intended that the insurer would pay the cost of
avoiding the defect in the first place or preventing the first failure of the
product to have been discovered to be in a defective or dangerous
condition before the occurrence.
Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co. v. Judd Co., 380 N.W.2d 122, 124-25 (Minn.
1986)  (quoting 2 R. Long, Law of Liability Insurance §11.11 (1983) ).
The court noted that to qualify under the recall exclusion, the repair or
replacement process must include more than the product that has already
failed. There is no withdrawal or recall where no attempt is made to preventfuture failures. The court held that because Scherer could not identify which
wood components would fail, it had to replace all components that could be
defective, thus the damages incurred for withdrawing all of the windows fit
squarely within the sistership exclusion. 
Bright Wood then argued that the sistership/recall exclusion should not
apply, because the definition of “impaired property” requires that: 1) the
property incorporating the insured’s defective product can be restored to use
by simply removing the insured’s defective product, and 2) “other property”
must be essentially undamaged, except for the inclusion of the insured’s
defective product. The court determined that the windows qualified as
impaired property. The court reasoned that the Scherer windows were
defective only because they contained Bright Wood’s defective product;
removal and replacement of Bright Wood’s components restored the
windows to use. Scherer’s business decision to replace its windows with
brand-new units in order to lower its labor costs did not change this result.
As the Bright Wood decision underscores, the recall exclusion precludes
coverage for the damages, costs, or expenses associated with the recall,
withdrawal, or repair of sister products that have not yet failed, but are
suspected of containing the same defect as a similar failed product, as well
as “impaired property.” Numerous courts have applied this exclusion to
preclude recovery of such recall expenses. See, e.g., Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co.
v. Hillside Bottling Co., Inc., 903 A. 2d 513, 387 N. J. Super. 224 (2006)
(this exclusion precludes coverage for the cost of a general recall—including
recalling apparently undamaged products to search for damaged components
otherwise not yet discovered); Keystone Filler & Mfg. Co. v. Am. Mining
Ins. Co., 179 F.Supp.2d  432, 439 (M.D. Penn. 2002)  (“this exclusion is
called the ‘sistership exclusion’ because it applies where products are
recalled because of known defects in their sister products”).
Unlike the risks excluded under most of the business risk exclusions,
“recall coverage” can be purchased by an insured, as a supplemental
coverage. A separate premium is charged for such coverage. Recall
coverage, however, is typically subject to a sublimit and may not provide
complete funding for the costs or recalling of replacing potentially defective
or actually defective products.Conclusion
In theory, whether damages are sought for “property damage” caused by
an “occurrence” in the first instance, as well as whether the loss is precluded
by the business risk exclusions should be a matter of interpreting the language
of the insurance contract. However, many courts have struggled with
interpreting the “property damage” liability coverage of the CGL policy.
They have grappled with claims of ambiguity, the “reasonable expectations
of the insured” and the concepts underlying the “business risk doctrine.” The
result has been conflicting case law on whether and when coverage might
apply for damages resulting from the insured’s faulty work or product.Additional Insureds and
Contractual Liability
SECTION II
By: Carol P. Keough, Esq.
Risk Shifting—A Critical Part of Commercial
Business
Risk shifting continues to be a major issue in risk management for both
large and small commercial companies. Policyholders demand broad
additional insured coverage and contractual liability coverage in their
Commercial General Liability (“CGL”) policies. Broad coverage in the CGL
policies opens the door for named insured companies to engage in a wide
range of complex commercial business contracts. Without the support of
additional insured and contractual liability coverage, the policyholder’s
ability to bid against its competitors and win certain jobs may be lost.
Faced with these demands for broad based coverage for additional
insured and for contractual liability, insurance companies have tried to define
the CGL insurance company’s duties and obligations to additional insureds
by the use of certain additional insured and contractual liability limitations
endorsements. Further, to meet the demand for primary and noncontributory
coverage as part of this risk shifting, new endorsements have been created.
All of these endorsements which are crafted to define the risks of the
insurance company, policyholder, and additional insured are the source of
complex insurance litigation.A continuing dilemma for policyholders and their agents or brokers is the
impact of these coverage extensions to additional insureds and to
indemnitees. The policyholder’s contractual obligations may assume liability
for a property owner, a general contractor, and certain other subcontractors
as additional insureds and contractual indemnitees. Another critical area in
additional insured coverage involves drilling and offshore coverage for
major oil companies by the drilling contractors. A policyholder may not
realize that he is putting his own limits of coverage at risk by granting this
additional insured status and agreeing to contractual indemnity in the
contracts. Conversely, he may agree to contractual terms that are not covered
by his insurance policies and unknowingly self-insure these risks. Therefore,
a critical part of business decisions involving contractual agreements are the
ramifications of insurance.
Regulations for certificates of insurance in a majority of states have
altered the risk shifting scheme by preventing misinformation through the use
of certificates of insurance. Many contracts have insurance requirements that
cannot be met by policies the insurers are willing to provide. To prevent
fraud or misinformation, new requirements for certificates of insurance range
from the requirement of only approved standard forms to strict guidelines
requiring the filing of any nonstandard form with the insurance regulatory
authority for approval before the form may be used.
In response to business necessities, contractual liability coverage is
included within standard Insurance Services Office (ISO) commercial
general liability forms, and a number of standardized additional insured
endorsements are available; companies that draft their own forms, called
manuscripts, also provide the coverage. So, policyholders and their agents or
brokers are faced with a garden-variety of forms that include some early
forms from 1973, manuscript forms, and revised forms from 2004. ISO also
revised the additional insured endorsements in 2013 to align more closely
with the coverage required by the contract terms. This may leave gaps in
coverage for a named insured when the policy limits and the contract terms
do not align.The Scope of Additional Insured Endorsements
Insurance companies do a careful analysis of the risk that is being
assumed under a CGL policy before offering coverage to a prospective
policyholder. However, after a policy is issued, the policyholder may engage
in commercial business transactions with any party pursuant to a written
contract that expands the risk assessment for that insurance company due to
additional insureds. Additional insured endorsements may open the door of
insurance coverage to high risk ventures, questionable companies, or even
municipalities, all of which may have poor safety records, a long list of
recent accidents, or numerous pending lawsuits related to their job sites.
Broad based additional insured endorsements continue to extend coverage as
additional insureds to these businesses, which may not have been approved
for coverage on their own with that insurance company.
The origin of the broad based additional insured endorsements that are
used is unclear. The general liability endorsement number, which still is seen
on current policies, may have originated with the CGL forms commonly used
beginning in 1973. Some insurance carriers have created a manuscript
endorsement to complement their proprietary general liability policies. For
example, surplus lines carriers that operate in some states are not required to
use the same standard or approved forms as carriers registered with the
department of insurance. In addition, some carriers simply have replaced the
schedule of specifically identified additional insured names with the words
“blanket” or “as required by written contract.” Both of these terms make the
identity of a specific person or entity impossible to determine when the
policy is issued. There are many variations of the additional insured
endorsements, but the problems and litigation appear to stem from the
“arising out of” language that has become standard wording as well as the
conflict between what the contract promises to the additional insured and
what the policy provides.
Insurance companies have attempted to limit this risk by adding terms to
these additional insured endorsements which limit the time of the risk to
“ongoi ng operations” or “completed operations.” Further, some insurance
companies have specifically stated in the endorsement that the insurance
company is not assuming liability for the additional insured’s solenegligence. Additional insured endorsements have attempted to limit the
liability for the additional insured by adding the phrase “caused by the
policyholder’s acts or omissions.’’ In 2004, ISO modified these broad based
endorsements with the language ”caused in whole or in part by the named
insured.” Further, new endorsements created by ISO in 2013 have
substantively changed the scope of additional insured coverage to more
closely align with the terms and provisions of the contract which requires
coverage. Another significant limitation added in the 2013 ISO endorsements
is the statement “only to the extent permitted by law.” The meaning of these
additional insured limitations or exclusions may not yet have been
definitively tested by the courts. Therefore, questions remain as to the scope
of insurance being provided to the additional insureds since the use of some
older forms may continue to be found in some jurisdictions as well as the
addition of new 2013 f orms.
Contractual Risk-Shifting Common
Construction and other commercial contracts continue to contain risk-
shifting provisions with a scope broad enough to protect owners,
subcontractors, general contractors, subsidiaries, and even, to some extent,
entire cities and towns as additional insureds. Even though the
policyholder’s background, accident record, and work experience have been
carefully examined to determine whether the risks fall within an acceptable
range for the insurance company, the additional insured endorsement may
greatly expand that risk—to an unknown “who” performing an unknown
scope of work in an unknown location.
The additional insured endorsement affects not only the insurance
company who writes the risk and the underwriters who determine the scope
of the risk. It also impacts the agents of the policyholder who are attempting
to make sure that the policyholder has adequate coverage to protect his
business in the event of any serious bodily injury or property damage claims.
One million dollars in primary coverage and two million dollars in umbrella
coverage may be adequate to protect a policyholder in business as a plumber.
However, when that same plumber is performing subcontract work at tendifferent industrial sites—including chemical plants, refineries, and for cities
—and every one of the owners, general contractors, and other subcontractors
of the entities are given additional insured status to comply with the
contracts, those minimal insurance limits may not provide sufficient
protection. The policyholder may have exposed itself to liability in excess of
its policy limits. In addition, a policyholder may have inadequate protection
to cover both itself and the additional insured for the same occurrence.
Therefore, insurance companies, underwriters, agents, and brokers need to
be aware of the issues and ramifications that stem from the use of additional
insured endorsements since they affect both the scope of coverage and the
policyholder’s coverage availability.
Typical Additional Insured Endorsements
In an attempt to restrict the broad coverage afforded to numerous
unknown entities, insurance companies have created additional insured
endorsements with other limiting provisions, including a specific location,
additional insured only as provided by written contract, and only for “your
work” for that additional insured.
In earlier forms in 1985, additional insured coverage was provided for
all operations—while the work was in progress and when the work was
completed. In 2001 the forms used required a separate endorsement for
ongoing operations and completed operations. This trend has continued as
additional insured endorsements have been modified throughout the years.
In 2004, ISO modified the coverage provided by the “arising out of”
language in its CG 20 10 07 04 and CG 20 37 07 04 forms to liability at least
caused in whole or in part by the named insured. These modifications are
made to the “Who Is An Insured” provision of a CGL policy. If one of these
forms is used to provide additional insured coverage, there will be no
coverage for the sole negligence of the additional insured.
Some of the policies provide slightly different language in the additional
insured endorsement which reads: “Who Is an Insured is amended to include
as an insured the person or organization shown in the schedule, but only withrespect to liability arising out of ‘your work’ for the insured or for you.” The
policy defines “your work” generally as “work or operations” performed by
you or on your behalf.
The term “your work” is also found in the ISO form CG 20 37 07 04. The
20 37 form amends the “Who Is An Insured” provision and includes as an
insured:
the identified persons or organizations, “but only with respect to
liability for ‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ caused in whole or in
part, by your work at the location designated and described in the
schedule of [the additional insured endorsement] performed for that
additional insured in the ‘products completed ope rations hazard.’”
Insurance companies have relied on restrictions in the additional insured
endorsements which may attempt to limit liability to vicarious liability and
exclude the sole negligence of the additional insured. Such a provision may
read:
Who Is An Insured (Section II) is amended to include as an insured
[additional insured], but only with respect to liability arising out of
[Named Insured’s] ongoing operations, but in no event for [additional
insured’s] sole negligence.
In ISO form CG 20 10 07 04 c reated in 2004, t he form itself further limits
when additional insured coverage may be provided by amending the “Who Is
An Insured” provision of the policy to only include as an insured:
the identified persons or organizations, “but only with
respect to liability for ‘bodily injury’, ‘property damage’ or
‘personal injury’ caused, in whole or in part, by: 1) Your acts
or omissions, or 2) The acts or omissions of those acting on
your behalf; in the performance of your ongoing operations
for the additional insured(s) at the locations designated in the
endorsement.”Further restrictions placed in the additional insured endorsements include
a time limit of “ongoing operations.” To ensure complete coverage for the
additional insured and to protect the named insured, the policy must contain
an endorsement for both ongoing operations and completed operations.
Therefore, if ISO forms from 2004 are being used the endorsements should
include CG 20 10 07 04 for ongoing operations and CG 20 37 07 04 for
completed ope rations.
Another exclusion placed in the additional insured endorsements
excludes coverage for bodily injury or property damage arising out of any act
of omission of the additional insured(s) or any of their employees, but allows
an exception to that exclusion for the general supervisor or work performed
for the additional insured(s) by the named insured.
An ISO form even offers additional insured status for owners, lessees, or
contractors on an automatic basis when required in construction agreements
with the policyholder through ISO form CG 20 33. However, the automatic
feature specifically excludes coverage for professional liability.
In 2013, ISO made substantive changes to the additional insured
endorsements. These changes were made to include limitations in states
where the state had enacted an anti-indemnity statute. Also the new forms
narrow the scope of coverage to what was required by the contract or
agreement. Moreover, the policy limits are restricted to what the contract
calls for or the applicable limits found in the declarations, whichever is less.
Some of the most significant language in the 2013 provisions is
as follows:
If coverage provided to the additional insured is required by
a contract or agreement, the insurance afforded to such
additional insured will not be broader than that which you
are required by the contract or agreement to provide for such
additional insured.The insurance provided to such additional insured only
applies to the extent permitted by law.
If coverage to the additional insured is required by a contract
or agreement, the most (the insurer) will pay on behalf of the
additional insured is the amount of insurance: 1) required by
the contract or agreement; or 2) available under the
applicable limits of insurance shown in the Declarations,
whichever is less. This endorsement shall not increase the
applicable limits of insurance shown in the Declarations.
The new 2013 modifications could leave an insured with a gap in
insurance coverage if the contract requires a $1 million coverage limit, the
policy provides a $2 million coverage limit and the property damage is for
$2 million. Instead of paying the full $2 million in damages, the coverage
under the endorsement would be limited to whichever is less or to only $1
million; thereby leaving the named insured on the hook for the difference.
This places both the language of the contract and the endorsement in play
when a determination is being made as to whether a named insured has
adequate coverage.
The policyholder commonly is required to agree to risk-shifting
provisions in a commercial contract. Additional insured status for the owner
or general contractor also is often required from companies that want to bid
on construction projects or enter into other commercial contracts as a regular
part of their business. For example, a company that contracts to do all the
pipe-fitting work in the construction of a chemical plant may be required to
provide additional insured status to the general contractor, the owner of the
plant, and possibly any number of other subcontractors also working on the
job depending on the laws of that state and the type of commercial contract at
issue.Difference between Additional Insured and
Contractual Liability Coverage
There is a critical difference between additional insured status and
contractual liability coverage as provided by a CGL policy. An additional
insured on the policy has all of the same rights under the policy as the
policyholder. This includes both defense and indemnity payments for claims
of bodi ly injury or property damage that may be covered by the policy.
Contractual liability, which is discussed in more detail subsequently, may
specifically preclude coverage for the sole negligence of the general
contractor or may not include liability for a particular category of worker—
such as other subcontractors that are hired by the general contractor. Further,
contractual liability may limit the potential recovery of defense costs. The
terms and conditions of the contract itself may further limit the liability of the
policyholder to a certain dollar amount below the actual limits of the
policyholder’s policy.
Broad based additional insured endorsements may open the door for full
coverage under the policy, but only if the accident falls within the parameters
of the additional insured endorsement. The sole negligence of the additional
insured owner or general contractor must be restricted by the endorsement or
specifically excluded to be effective. Only the clear and specific language of
the additional insured endorsement itself, coupled with the specific coverage
limitations set forth in the terms of the CGL policy, can control and limit the
coverage provided to an additional insured. The specific language of
additional insured endorsements has been the subject of litigation when the
insurance company wants to limit coverage, but the additional insured
believes it is entitled to full coverage for both defense and indemnity. Recent
litigation focuses on the scope of coverage available to an additional insured
when interpreting both the grant of coverage to additional insureds and
exclusions or restrictions found in the additional insured endorsements.
In some instances, exclusions which apply to “you”, the named
insured(s), do not apply to an “insured”, giving the additional insured even
broader coverage than the named insured. For example, the property damage
exclusions of a CGL policy refer to “you” or “your”, a term defined in theCGL policy as applying to the “named insured(s)”. An analysis of coverage
depending on the accident may require a review of the entire policy to
determine what is meant by the additional insured endorsement and how
much coverage to which an additional insured is entitled.
Courts Broadly Interpret “Arising out of” Wording
Originally, it was thought that additional insured liability was restricted
because of the commonly used language, “but only with respect to liability
arising out of the policyholder’s operations” and/or “liability arising out of
‘your work’ for the insured or for you” found in additional insured
endorsements. The phrase “arising out of” has generally been interpreted to
mean “directly from” by insurance carriers.
For example, three employees of a subcontractor are welding sheet metal
on the property of the owner of a natural-gas-pipeline plant. Unknown to
these employees, certain areas of the plant are being cleared of residue
pockets of gas by an employee of the plant’s owner. An explosion that is
caused by the work being done by the plant employee severely injures the
subcontractor’s (policyholder’s) employees. The employees sue the plant’s
owner, who claims that he is entitled to defense and indemnity from the
subcontractor through the additional insured endorsement attached to the
subcontractor’s CGL policy. The subcontractor’s insurance company
determines there is no coverage under the policy because the accident
resulted from the sole negligence of the contractor and did not arise out of
or come directly from the work of the subcontractor.
This type of situation is seen in Granite Construction Co. v. Bituminous
Ins. Co., 832 S.W.2d 427 (Tex. Civ. App. 1992, no writ), in which the court
determined the additional insured endorsement excluded coverage for the
additional insured’s own negligence. Granite had contracted with Brown
Company to haul asphalt from its construction site. One of Brown’s
employees was injured while the Granite employees loaded the asphalt onto
Brown’s truck. The court concluded that, because the loading of the granite
was the sole responsibility of Granite and not Brown, the additional insuredendorsement with the arising out of language did not provide coverage for
Granite under Brown’s policy for the accident in question.
Likewise, in Davis v. LTV Steel Co., 716 N.E.2d 766 (Ohio App. 1998),
the court reasoned that “the express language of the policy did not afford
coverage to LTV for its own negligence.” As a result, the court ruled that
LTV was not entitled to coverage under the additional insured endorsement
contained in the subcontractor’s policy.
However, the majority of courts nationwide, including the Texas courts,
have given the “arising out of” language a much broader interpretation. The
courts have expanded coverage beyond simple vicarious liability of the
additional insureds for the policyholder’s work. The Third Circuit under
Pennsylvania law, in Aetna Casualty and Surety Co. v. Ocean Accident
Guaranty Corp., 386 F .2d 413 ( 3rd Cir. 1967) , stated “arising out of” is very
“broad and vague”. The court said “it means connected with and not
proximately caused by.” Generally stated, this broader interpretation is that
when the worker’s injury occurs while he is on the premises to do the work
of his employer, his injury arises out of the policyholder’s work, even if the
cause of the injury is the additional insured’s negligence. In Admiral Ins. Co.
v. Trident N.G.L., Inc., 988 S .W.2d 451 ( Tex. App.-Houston [1st Dist.] 1999,
pet. denied), an explosion injured an employee of the policyholder who was
performing maintenance work on Trident’s equipment. The court reasoned
that the maintenance and resulting explosion arose from the policyholder’s
work but that the policy did not require that the explosion be the fault of the
policyholder. Other similar cases include Shell Oil Co. v. AC&S, Inc., 649
N.E. 2d 946 (Ill. App. 1995) , in which an AC&S employee tripped on
Shell’s pipes and was injured. The court stated that the arising out of
language meant “originating from” or “having its origins in” so that AC&S’s
insurance company did owe a duty to defend Shell in the suit. In Marathon
Ashland Pipeline LLC v. Maryland Cas. Co., 243 F.3d 1232 (10th Cir.
2001) , the court also stated that the arising out of language meant the natural
and reasonable consequences of the policyholder’s operations.
“Arising out of” Equates to Broad Coverage in Many
JurisdictionsThe additional insured endorsement and how far the “arising out of”
language can be stretched have been tested across the country. Instead of
restricting coverage for the additional insured as originally crafted, this
wording expanded coverage to additional insureds because of the legal
interpretation by the courts.
In the Tenth Circuit, the court considered these facts: a patron of a city
festival was injured when he jumped over a retaining wall when trying to
quickly get to a portable toilet. The patron sued the city, which called upon
the additional insured endorsement for coverage under the festival company’s
general liability policy. Although the city stipulated that it alone was
negligent, the court held that, because the injury “arose out of” the operation
of the festival, the city had coverage under the additional insured
endorsement. See McIntosh v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 992 F.2d 251 (10th Cir.
1993) .
Similarly in another case, a subcontractor performing work for the
general contractor was required to add the general contractor as an
additional insured on its CGL policy. One of the employees of the
subcontractor was injured on the job solely as a result of the general
contractor’s negligence. The court held that, because the injury occurred in
the course of and contemporaneously with the subcontractor’s work with the
general contractor, the general contractor was covered for the employee’s
negligence claims by virtue of his additional insured status. See Merchant’s
Ins. Co. v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co., 143 F.3d 5 (1st Cir. 1998) ; See also
Hartford Accid. & Indem. Co. v. U.S. Natural Res. Inc. 897 F . Supp. 466 ( D.
Oregon 1995) .
A majority of courts now appear to hold that the “arising out of”
language translates into merely a causal connection between the injury and
the work being performed by the policyholder for the additional insured. For
example, in McCarthy Bros. Co. v. Continental Lloyds Ins. Co., 7 S.W.3d
725 (Tex. App.–Austin 1999, no pet.), an employee was simply going to get
tools for his work as an electrician when he fell on a slippery incline. The
court found that because the employee was getting tools to perform his job
for the policyholder to do electrical work for McCarthy, the general
contractor, there was a causal connection between the injury and theperformance of work by the subcontractor for the general contractor.
Therefore, the court found that liability “arose out of” the subcontractor’s
work for the general contractor and that there was coverage pursuant to the
additional insured endorsement.
Likewise, in Saav edra v. Murphy Oil U.S.A, 930 F.2d. 1104 (5th Cir.
1991) , an employee of a subcontractor slipped and was injured on Murphy
Oil’s premises. The court ruled that the subcontractor’s insurance company
was obligated to defend and indemnify Murphy as an additional insured on
the subcontractor’s policy. The court reasoned that the additional insured
provision accomplishes two obj ectives.
“First, it describes who is included as an additional insured: insureds
are covered under this policy as required by written contract. Second,
the policy places a single limitation on its obligation to give Murphy
(and others) additional insured status. The insured status arises only
with respect to operations performed by or for the policyholder.
Because the accident Saavedra sues upon is directly related to Lou-
Con’s work, this clause is satisfied, and the policy extends insured
status to Murphy.”
Similar cases are Philadelphia Elec. Co. v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co.,
721 F. Supp. 740 (E.D. Pa. 1989) , in which the court ruled that additional
insureds are covered for their own negligence as long as the injuries are
related to the work of the policyholder, and Cas. Ins. Co. v. Northbrook
Prop. & Casualty. Co., 501 N.E. 2d 812 (Ill. App. 1986), in which the court
reasoned that the wording, “arising out of operations” performed by the
additional insured for the policyholder, covered the additional insured for its
own negligence.
Therefore, the “arising out of” language has now generally expanded
additional insured coverage to cover the work of the general contractor, the
owner, and other subcontractors whom the policyholder makes agreements
with in their numerous commercial contracts as long as some causal
connection can be made to the named insured’s work.Broad Coverage for an Additional Insured, but Not
Unlimited
Courts have disputed the breadth of additional insured endorsements that
provide coverage to an additional insured, “but only with respect to acts or
omissions of the policyholder in connection with the policyholder’s
operations. . . .” Some courts have found that even if the policyholder is not
negligent, coverage can be afforded to an additional insured. U.S. Fire Ins.
Co. v. Aetna Life Ins. and Cas. Co., 291 Ill. App.3d 991, 225 (1st Dist
1997) . (Even if the named insured is not negligent, the policy language “acts”
is not limited to “negligent” acts.) Conversely, The Houston Court of
Appeals found that unless the policyholder is named in the suit as a
defendant, or allegations are made against the policyholder for negligence,
there can be no duty to defend or indemnify a purported additional insured.
D.R. Horton – Texas, Ltd. v. Markel Int’l Ins. Co., Ltd., 2006 WL
3040745* 4 (Tex.App – Houston [14th Dist.] 2006, no pet.). However, in
Atofina Petrochemicals, Inc. v. Cont. Ins. Co., 185 S. W. 3d 440, 442-
443(Tex. 2006) , the court held that if the plaintiff made allegations against
the named insured, even if the named insured was not named as a party, the
additional insured could obt ain coverage.
Underwriter Evaluations of Risk
Even if the policyholder is a company performing electrical work, and
the underwriters for the insurance carrier give careful consideration to the
risk for that type of work, the broad expanse of the “arising out of language”
poses a real problem for the underwriter’s evaluation of the risk.
Underwriters and agents should ask more questions about who will perform
the electrical work and the location of the site where the policyholder will
be performing that work.
Additional insured endorsements can be limited if potential additional
insureds are specifically named. Prior to the loss, the insurance company and
the agent can evaluate the risk by an investigation of any potential additional
insureds identified. Insurance companies can use a specific endorsement that
excludes the sole negligence of the additional insured from coverage. Theuse of endorsements with limiting language was reviewed in both BP
Chemicals, Inc. v. First State Ins. Co., 226 F.3d 420 (6th Cir. 2000)  and
Boise Cascade Corp. v. Reliance, 129 F. Supp. 2d 41 (D. Maine 2001) . In
both cases, the courts upheld the limiting language.
However, in recent years many of the additional insured endorsements
being used merely state that whoever is listed on the schedule is an
additional insured. Even though some schedules do identify specifically
named companies or contractors, many simply state: “as required by written
contract”, “blanket”, or other similar language that encompass any person or
entity that is required to be named as an additional insured in the contract.
Restrictions such as requiring the policyholder “to add another as an
additional insured on the policy under a written contract” are liberally
construed in favor of coverage. For example: An employee of A&B was
injured unloading steel on FINA’s property. FINA was sued and sought
coverage from A&B based on A&B’s agreement to provide insurance to
cover the FINA property. The insurance company argued the contract
between FINA and A&B was not definite enough to trigger additional
insured coverage. In Atofina the Texas Supreme Court disagreed and relied
on the relationship between A&B and FINA to show the intent of the parties
was to provide FINA with additional insured coverage.
Underwriters have limited the time when coverage is available to
additional insureds. The existence of a written contract is also required
before additional insured coverage is available. Underwriters have also
added exclusions to the additional insured endorsements to control the risks
associated with insuring unknown additional insureds. Although the
limitations and exclusions have been somewhat helpful, courts continue to
allow for broad additional insured coverage based on endorsements added to
the CGL policies. Underwriters continue to be challenged to clarify in plain
language the coverage which is being provided. In the Atofina case above ,
there was a broad grant of coverage for all liability arising out of A&B’s
work. However, the second paragraph of the policy attempted to state that
there would be no coverage for any acts or omissions on the part of FINA or
its employees. The court held this only excluded sole negligence, not “all”
conduct of FINA. Id.As observed above , underwriters have tried to develop additional
insured provisions which address the broad scope of coverage. At minimum,
most insureds have been able to establish that the policy does not cover the
sole negligence of the additional insured under a properly worded grant of
coverage or exclusion. A sample of a provision the Texas Supreme Court
found effective is as follows:
Who Is An Insured Section II is amended to include as an
insured [additional insured,] but only with respect to liability
arising out of [Named Insured’s] ongoing operations
performed for [additional insured] but in no event for
[additional insured’s] sole negligence.
Evanston Ins. Co. v. Atofina Petrochemicals, 256 S.W. 3d 660 (Tex.
2008) .
Further, the court made it clear that the scope of coverage is determined
by the policy alone and the scope of the indemnity agreement is not relevant
to that determination. Id. If an insurance policy does not cover the indemnity
obligation, the obligor [Named Insured] remains exposed to liability. Id.
Under Florida law, the court looked at allegations in a petition which
alleged negligence against the policyholder and independent negligence
solely against the additional insured. Homeowners suffered property damage
which was caused by excavation of property to build a Home Depot store.
Home Depot sought additional insured coverage under the excavation
company’s insurance policy. The court found Home Depot was an additional
insured even though “sole negligence” was excluded because some
obligations alleged vicarious liability against Home Depot for the
policyholder’s operations. Home Depot U.S.A. v. National Fire Ins. Co. of
Hartford, 2007 W L 846525 ( N.D. Tex. 2007) .
New Trend to Restrict Additional Insured Coverage
In an effort to provide underwriters with the clear and unambiguous
language necessary to limit additional insured coverage, ISO has modifiedthe broad based language in the revised 2004 additional insured form.
Moreover, in 2013, the ISO forms substantively changed to limit additional
insured coverage even further. The trend in additional insured coverage is to
restrict the coverage to liability caused in whole and in part by the Named
Insured’s ongoing or completed ope rations.
In 2004 , ISO revised its standard ISO form CG 20 10 07 04 for
additional insureds. The key change in the language changes the way that the
additional insured’s ongoing operations are connected to the additional
insured’s liability. The “arising out of” language is gone from the
endorsement. The new language states:
A. Section II – W ho Is An Insured is amended to include as an additional
insured the person(s) or organization(s) shown in the Schedule, but
only with respect to liability for “bodily injury,” “property damage,”
or “personal or advertising injury,” caused in whole or in part by:
1.    Your acts or omissions; or
2.    T he acts or omission of those acting on your behalf; in the
performance of your ongoing operations for the additional
insured(s) at the location(s) designated above .
The purpose of this endorsement is to focus on an injury caused in whole
or in part by the policyholder before additional insured coverage is
available. The following example demonstrates this principle:
An employee of a roofing manufacturer is injured when she delivered
roof tiles to the job site of the general contractor. The policyholder roofer is
working at the site, but liability is found 60 percent against the general
contractor and 40 percent against the manufacturer’s employee. There is no
additional insured coverage for the general contractor under form CG 20 10
07 04. Under these facts, the sole negligence of the general contractor does
not trigger additional insured coverage.
Similarly, a general contractor is sued by the employee of a subcontractor
who is working at the job site. There is no allegation that the injury was
caused in whole or in part by the named insured subcontractor. The carrierdenied coverage in Schafer v. Paragano Custom Building, Inc., 2010 WL
624108 (N.J. Supr. A. D. February 4, 2010) . The court held that the policy
does not provide coverage for the additional insured’s own acts or
omissions.
A number of states have now refused to allow subcontractors or insurers
through the use of additional insured endorsements to indemnify a contractor
for its own negligence. Anti-indemnity statutes not only address indemnity
clauses in contracts, but in some instances find it is illegal to use an
additional insured endorsement to cover the negligence of a purported
additional insured. CA, CO, KS, LA, MT, NM, OK, TN, and TX anti-
indemnity statutes also apply to additional insured coverage.
As indicated above , in 2013, ISO moved to fix some of the broad
implications from additional insured coverage by requiring that coverage is
restricted to the extent allowed by law. This aligns with the state laws that
preclude coverage through anti-indemnity statutes.
Further, the 2013 endorsements restrict coverage to that which is
required by contract and to the limits that are required by the contract or the
policy, whichever is less. These new endorsements keep in place the
modifications of 2004 noted above  as to “caused in whole or in part” by the
named insured’s acts or omissions or those of someone acting on behalf of
the named insured.
The Policy and The Contract – Are They Separate and
Independent?
One recent issue that has confused the interpretation by the courts of
additional insured endorsements is the extent to which the policy of the
named insured is separate and independent from the contract that the insured
has entered into with the purported additional insured.
The events of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico are
well known in the country. From that spill, there has been extended litigation
regarding the additional insurance coverage owed by the drilling rig ownerTransocean, Ltd. to British Petroleum (BP). Although the issue arises under
Texas law, additional insured coverage nationwide could be affected by a
Texas Supreme Court decision as to whether additional insured coverage is
affected by the limitations agreed to in the contract between the named
insured and the purported additional insured or whether the policy alone
controls what coverage is provided. BP argued that the policy alone controls
and any limitation in the contract by Transocean would not affect the
additional insurance coverage because the policy and the contract are
separate and independent. Transocean argued the contract limited its liability
and BP had no coverage as an additional insured. The district court agreed
with Transocean and found that BP had no coverage as an additional insured.
The case was appealed to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals who initially
found in favor of BP, but withdrew the decision and sent certified questions
to the Texas Supreme Court to determine if the policies of insurance alone
determine coverage because the policy and the contract are separate and
independent.
In the Evanston Insurance case, the Texas Supreme Court found that the
policy alone did control coverage for the additional insured. Transocean
argued that the contract is referred to and incorporated into the insurance
policy and the liability of Transocean is limited by what the contract
provides, therefore Evanston does not apply to the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill.
The decisions of the Texas Supreme Court are usually followed by the
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals and so will influence insurance coverage
decisions in other jurisdictions nationwide.
The 2013 ISO form appears to have been created with this Transocean-
type contract limitation in mind by limiting coverage to the additional insured
to no broader than that to which the named insured is required to provide by
written contract. However, whatever the Texas Supreme Court decides,
unless the policy is clear on its face, more litigation nationwide may ensue
on the issue of whether the additional insured coverage is limited by specific
liability limitations in the contract that do n ot appear in the additional insured
endorsement.Different Types of Additional Insured Status
Unlike the broad based additional insured endorsements, some
endorsements cover more specific risks and generally name the additional
insured party. Examples of these are endorsements for vendors, landlords,
condominium unit owners, church members, cities, and lessors of leased
equipment. Each one of these endorsements should be carefully reviewed to
determine the extent of protection that is provided to the additional insured.
Although some of these endorsements were created by ISO or some may be
manuscript, it is unclear as to whether these endorsements have evolved to
the trend for limiting additional insured coverage.
However, when these endorsements rely on the “arising out of” language,
careful consideration should be given to who is added as additional insureds.
Although these specific endorsements do not seem to be litigated to the same
extent as the broad based additional insured endorsements, it appears likely
that the “arising out of” language that appears in them would be given the
same broad interpretation as on the broad based additional insured
endorsements. One can expect from the case law previously cited that this
type of language would cover the additional insured for its own negligence if
the activity being performed is related to the work of the policyholder.
Conversely, additional restrictions to the grant of coverage to additional
insureds as well as exclusions for sole negligence will affect the scope of
coverage. Therefore, if the insurance company only intends to cover
vicarious liability, there should be clear language in the endorsement that
sole negligence of the additional insured and its employees is excluded.
Coverage Limits in Primary Policies Need More Careful
Examination
Insureds tend to purchase $1 million in primary CGL coverage. Then,
depending upon the type of business and the risk involved, the insured may
purchase additional umbrella or excess coverage above  the $1 million limit.
Within one policy year, the most coverage usually available from the primary
policy for any single accident or occurrence will be $1 million despite the
number of insureds, suits, or claims. Some policyholders will have anaggregate limit of $2 million for all accidents and occurrences in that policy
year, but some aggregate limits are only $1 m illion.
The additional insured provisions may be important in the consideration
of policy limits and the amount of excess coverage that the named insured
will need to protect its interests. The 2013 ISO endorsements may leave a
gap in the insurance coverage when the contract limits coverage to $1
million, but the accident damages exceed that amount. More careful
consideration should be given to the limits both in the contract and the policy
if an insured is going to be protected when the new endorsements are used to
provide additional insured coverage.
Analysis of the Coverage Needed Must Include Many
Factors
It is standard practice for almost every construction and business contract
to contain additional insured provisions requiring that the policyholder
(subcontractor) name the other contracting party (owner or general
contractor) as an additional insured. Risk managers, insurance agents,
underwriters, and insurance carriers need to be more aware of how easily
the insured’s CGL limits of liability can be eroded through this practice.
Additional insureds may expand the insured’s risk to cities, chemical plant
owners, pipeline owners, oil well operators, manufacturers, and refineries.
A standard $1 million primary policy is often very little protection for a
policyholder that could face any number of serious bodily injury or property
damage claims as a result of this exposure expansion.
For example, the policyholder subcontractor, who performs maintenance
work at a chemical plant, is required to name the chemical plant owner as an
additional insured. While the subcontractor’s workers are at the plant, an
explosion kills three of the subcontractor’s employees. Within the same
policy time frame another accident occurs at another plant at which the
policyholder subcontractor is working. Both of the plant owners, who are
additional insureds on the subcontractor’s CGL policy, are sued after each of
the accidents. The potential bodily injury damages from both of these
accidents exceed $3 million. A policyholder subcontractor with only $1million in primary coverage and $2 million in excess coverage may not have
adequate limits to handle the expanded risk he has taken on. Without adequate
insurance protection, the policyholder’s own assets are at risk for any
additional bodi ly injury or property damage claims within that policy year.
Another circumstance that may arise is when a policyholder receives
three or four competing claims for “bodily injury” or “property damage” all
arising from the same accident or occurrence. Each claim in itself may not
exceed the $1 million policy limit or aggregate. However, now the insured is
faced with the dilemma that paying any of the claims will erode the policy
limit, leaving him with inadequate insurance to pay the remaining—or
subsequent—claims.
Finally, the policyholder may face litigation for failing to provide the
additional insured coverage which was required by the contract. If a
policyholder subcontractor depletes his policy limit on one claim, then if
there are subsequent claims under the same policy, and no available funds for
additional insureds, the policyholder may face liability for the loss, or a
breach of contract claim. For example, the policyholder had only $1 million
of available coverage. The allegations were that six people died as a result
of both negligence and a defective product. The additional insured demanded
defense and indemnity. The policyholder who was also sued had little or no
assets other than a $1 million policy, which only covered the policyholder’s
liability. The additional insured paid $4 million to settle the case, then sued
the policyholder, resulting in a multi-million dollar judgment.
Potential Agent E&O Problem
When the policyholder is faced with inadequate limits for pending
claims, the insurance agent or broker who worked with the policyholder to
develop the insurance program may be the target of litigation. If the agent or
broker has been asked specifically to evaluate the potential risks and
recommend both adequate policy limits and coverage, then the policyholder
will rely on his professional advice when purchasing coverage. For example,
when the agent has recommended an insurance program with $1 million in
coverage, and a $1 m illion aggregate, the following may happen.A road constructor hires subcontractors to provide proper signage,
barrels and road markings at the road construction site. One subcontractor
also agreed to assist with traffic control. When a vehicle ran off the road and
flipped over, killing one passenger and injuring two others, the general
contractor sought additional insured coverage from the subcontractor, who
handled traffic control. The same subcontractor also had additional insured
coverage for the other subcontractors and the state regulatory department.
The available policy limits were wholly inadequate to protect the
subcontractor from the multi-million dollar suit.
The agent who fails to recognize the expanded insurance needs that
additional insured endorsements have created may make representations that
the insured is adequately protected. This agent could find herself (or her
errors and omission insurance carrier) picking up the cost for the liability
damages outside the policyholder’s insurance program.
A policyholder faced with the prospect of inadequate insurance and
possible financial ruin will look to the professionals who provided him with
insurance coverage to recover losses. Even the insurance company,
depending on the state in which the policyholder is located, may face
possible liability for the representations of certain agents. Therefore, careful
evaluation of the risks faced by a policyholder when additional insured
coverage is a part of her insurance program is a critical issue not to be
ignored by underwriters, agents, and brokers.
Level of Care
Underwriters generally perform an extensive review and analysis of
prior insurance claims, accident record, financial security, and business
location when evaluating the risk to providing CGL coverage to a potential
insured. However, when using a broad based additional insured endorsement
the insured can execute contracts and agreements that put the policy limits at
risk without any investigation of the exposures involved. The insurance
carrier, in conjunction with the agents who are procuring these policies,
needs to determine ways to evaluate the risk when additional insureds are
required in the policyholder’s insurance program.One way to better evaluate the risk is to eliminate the broad based
additional insured endorsements and replace them with endorsements
specifically identifying the name of the person or company that will be
additional insureds. Requiring that policyholders request additional insured
status for their contractual partners identifies the particular additional
insured and puts the agent and insurance company on notice of a new risk that
should be evaluated. The insurance company then can investigate more fully
the actual risk that is being undertaken before issuing the additional insured
endorsement.
Some insureds and agents believe that such review is unnecessarily time-
consuming and hampers contractual relationships. Many insureds continue to
blindly enter into contracts without analyzing whether they have adequate
insurance. It may seem quicker to adopt the broad based additional insured
process instead of reviewing each contract individually—until claims occur
and the policyholder’s limits are put in jeopardy. Additional insureds have
added contract language that places liability directly on the named insured
even if they are inadequately insured to cover such liability.
Some insurance companies are also requiring that the policyholder
require their subcontractors to maintain certain levels of insurance. Unless
the policyholder complied with this provision, a premium surcharge will be
charged at the end of the policy period to cover the additional risk.
In this vein, some insurance companies have instituted procedures that
additional insured status will not be granted unless they are provided with a
contract that describes the scope of the work of both the additional insured
and the policyholder so the risk can be more adequately assessed. However,
once a policy is written, and the premium paid, it is unlikely the insurance
company will review the additional insured risk, leaving that analysis to
agents and the policyholder.
Finally, additional insured endorsements can limit the scope of coverage
provided to the additional insureds by restricting coverage to “ongoing
operations” or “completed operations” and “caused in whole or in part by
the named insured’s work.” Additional insured endorsements at a minimum
should exclude coverage for the sole negligence of the additional insured and
its employees. Further, consideration should be given to more restrictiveendorsements or manuscript endorsements which limit liability to only
vicarious liability.
A key factor to limit additional insured coverage is to consider what
liability the insured is responsible for in the contract. Clear limitations as
found in the 2004 and 2013 endorsements will not end litigation if the
contracts leave a named insured at risk for millions of dollars in excess of
what the policy provides.
Contractual Liability Issues
Contractual liability is controlled to some extent by the terms of the CGL
policy. Generally, the policy only provides coverage for liability assumed by
an insured under an “insured contract”. An “insured contract” is a defined
term in the CGL policy that includes six types of contracts. For the purposes
of this section, only the sixth type of insured contract is discussed.
Insured Contracts
In the current ISO CGL form, this sixth category is:
f.    That part of any other contract or agreement pertaining to
your business (including an indemnification of a
municipality in connection with work performed for a
municipality) under which you assume the tort liability
of another party to pay for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” to a third person or organization. Tort liability
means a liability that would be imposed by law in the
absence of any contract or agreement.
Paragraph f. doe s not include that part of any contract or agreement:(1)    That indemnifies a railroad for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” arising out of construction or demolition operations,
within 50 feet of any railroad property and affecting any railroad
bridge or trestle, tracks, road-beds, tunnel, underpass or
crossing;
(2)    That indemnifies an architect, engineer or surveyor for injury or
damage arising out of:
(a)    Preparing, approving, or failing to prepare or approve,
maps, shop dr awings, opinions, reports, surveys, field
orders, change orders or drawings and specifications; or
(b)    Giving directions or instructions, or failing to give them,
if that is the primary cause of the injury or damage; or
(3)    Under which the insured, if an architect, engineer or surveyor,
assumes liability for an injury or damage arising out of the
insured’s rendering or failure to render professional services,
including those listed in (2) above  and supervisory, inspection,
architectural or engineering activities.
There is now an amended “insured contract” definition under Form CG
24 26 04 13. I n the amended endorsement paragraph, it now reads:
f.    That part of any other contract or agreement pertaining to
your business (including an indemnification of a
municipality in connection with work performed for a
municipality) under which you assume the tort liability
of another party to pay for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” to a third person or organization provided the
“bodily injury” or “property damage” is caused, in whole
or in part, by you or by those acting on your behalf.
However, such part of a contract or agreement shall only
be considered an “insured contract” to the extent your
assumption of the tort liability is permitted by law. Tortliability means a liability that would be imposed by law
in the absence of any contract or agreement.
The amended insured contract definition limits the liability assumed by
the insured under the “insured contract.” The limiting language is: “provided
the ‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ is caused in whole or in part by you
or by those acting on your behalf.” This language appears to eliminate sole
negligence and adds the restriction of vicarious liability now found in the
amended ISO 2013 additional insured endorsement discussed above . This
may leave a policyholder unprotected if the policyholder has promised
indemnity to another party for sole negligence. Complex insurance litigation
in the future will also determine the meaning of such phrases “in whole or in
part” and “caused by” to determine the scope of coverage under the amended
“insured contract” definition.
In essence, the tort liability assumed under a contract may expand the
policyholder’s CGL coverage to the indemnity he promises to a general
contractor, an owner, the subsidiaries of the owner, and, possibly, other
subcontractors working for the contractor if such liability falls within the
policy coverage. The coverage is limited only by the indemnification
provisions of the contract itself and the specific terms of the policy.
Contractual Indemnity Wording
A typical construction contract includes this type of indemnity provision:
Named Insured agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless Company WW from any and all claims of every
kind and character which may be asserted against Company
WW, the owner, the employees, and the subcontractors of
Company WW, by the agents and/or employees of the named
insured by reason of or in any way connected with the
performance of named insured’s contract regardless of
whether the damages are the result of the sole negligence of
the property owner, of Company WW, its employees, agents,or subsidiaries, and/or concurrent negligence with the named
insured, its employees, and agents.
According to Black’s Law Dictionar y, “indemnify” means to restore a
person in whole or in part by payment, repair or replacement.
Under an indemnity provision, the named insured often agrees to assume
both defense costs and damages that result from injury to any employee or
agent of the named insured. The indemnity clause may encompass damages
that result from the negligence of the named insured, concurrent negligence of
the named insured and the general contractor or owner, or even for the sole
negligence of the general contractor or owner.
As previously noted, many states have now passed anti-indemnity statutes
which affect the enforceability of these indemnity clauses. These anti-
indemnity provisions are aimed at the construction, and oil and gas industries
in particular to cure the uneven bargaining power of small contractors who
want to bid for work with larger general contractors, oil companies, or rig
owners. However, not all contracts are so limited and hold harmless
indemnity clauses are regularly found in commercial leases, municipal
contracts, school district contracts, and other government contracts which are
not controlled or may be excluded from the ant-indemnity laws. The statutes
may explicitly allow for indemnity if an employee of the subcontractor sues
the contractor or the owner. Therefore, contractual liability coverage
continues to be a very important part of every named insured’s insurance
program.
Hold Harmless Wording and Defense Costs
It is important to note that “hold harmless” may mean “to assume all
expenses incident to the defense of any claim and to fully compensate an
indemnitee for all loss or expense,” as the court explained in Bank El Paso v.
Powell, 550 S.W.2d 383 (Tex. App. – El Paso 1977, no writ) and Pinney v.
Tarpley, 686 S.W.2d 574 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1985) . Black’s Law Dictionar y
defines “hold harmless” as an “agreement or contract” in which one partyagrees to hold the other without responsibility for damage or other liability
arising out of the transaction invoked (emphasis added).
The standard ISO CGL form provides that defense costs assumed in a
contract or agreement are available for parties other than an insured as long
as the liability for defense also has been assumed in the insured contract and
the insurance applies to the allegations. The Third Circuit in Kiewit Eastern
Co. v. L&R Constr. Co., Inc., 44 F.3d 1194 (3rd Cir. 1995) , confirmed that
defense costs are included as long as the insured assumes those costs in the
contract.
However, many insurance companies have limited contractual liability
coverage under their CGL policies to damages for “bodily injury” or
“property damage” excluding defense costs and litigation expenses, even
though the contractual provisions usually require a named insured to
“indemnify, defend, and hold harmless” the other party. The basis for the
denial of coverage is that the policies will pay only damages.
The definition of hold harmless distinguishes damage and loss from
expenses and other liability. Therefore, when the policy only agrees to pay
for “bodily injury” or “property damage,” the insurance company may argue
that defense costs are not included. In addition, the duties to defend and
indemnify are generally considered separate obligations of the insurance
company.
More recent CGL forms may provide for defense costs to a contractual
indemnitee as supplemental payments under the named insured’s policy
which would be an expense and not damages.
There are a number of variations to the payment of defense costs under
contractual liability coverage which continue to evolve. An important
consideration is whether the defense costs will erode the policy limits. ISO
forms from 1992 forward may specifically identify defense costs under
contractual liability coverage as damages. If defense costs are damages, then
whenever the insurer pays for the defense costs of the contractual indemnitee
the policy limit on damages is reduced. This could ultimately affect the
ability of the named insured to pay all of the actual damages in a lawsuit.
Eroding limits for defense costs may place the named insured at risk for anyremaining unprotected loss that remains after the defense costs are paid.
Further, if the defense is within the limits and a settlement is paid for one
insured which exhausts the policy limits, the defense will end.
The ISO CGL policy form provides a defense in addition to the limits,
but only if the following conditions are all met:
•    the subcontractor assumed the general contractor’s liability in an
insured contract;
•    the policy covers the loss;
•    there is no conflict of interest between the policyholder and the
general contractor;
•    bot h parties ask for a defense from the insurer and agree to the same
counsel; and
•    the general contractor agrees to coope rate in writing to any
settlement of the claim.
This new provision also may pose problems for the named insured if
there is a dispute about what person or entity is responsible for the accident.
Generally the general contractor or whoever is offering the contracted-for
work will demand both contractual liability coverage and additional insured
coverage to make sure that a defense is available under the subcontractor’s
policy if there is a suit.
Assume the Tort Liability of Another
It appears that courts across the country are consistent in the
determination that an “insured contract” exists only if the policyholder
assumes the tort liability of another. Simply agreeing to provide
compensation to a third party for actions against an insured where the third
party is added to the suit may not trigger the “insured contract” definition
under contractual liability coverage. Alex Robertson v. Imperial Cas. &
Indem. Co., 8 Cal. App. 4th 338, 10 Cal. Rptr. 165 (1992) . There must be anexpress provision in the contract which provides that the policyholder
assume the other party’s liability and the insured must then assume the tort
liability of another. United States Fid. & Guar. Co., 120 S.W.3d 556 (Ark.
2003) . Contractual liability coverage is limited to a specific assumption by
the insured of liability that results from negligence of a third party. Therefore,
a poorly worded contractual obligation may not be covered by the
contractual liability coverage under a policy.
Potential Conflict
A conflict can develop between the policyholder and the party who has
bargained for indemnification when it appears there is no insurance coverage
for defense. The insured contract is critical to understanding the risk assumed
by the policyholder. However, the risk assumed may conflict with the express
terms or exclusions of the policyholder’s policy. Often the insurance
company will not have seen the “insured contract.” After the loss, the
insurance company analyzes what is covered and what is not. The
policyholder may face what appears to be an unexpected gap in coverage, or,
worse, litigation from the party that was indemnified in the contract
demanding full defense and indemnity.
State law also may enter the quagmire of coverage for indemnity assumed
in an insured contract. For example, as previously discussed, many states
have statutes that include anti-indemnity provisions for certain types of
contracts and mutual indemnity. In Texas and New Mexico, for example,
indemnity-shifting provisions related to oil, gas wells, and construction
preclude the assumption of the sole negligence of the owner and/or general
contractor by a subcontractor.
Some states have established by case law that the assumption of the sole
negligence of one party by another in a contract is against public policy and
void. Therefore it is important to be aware of the laws of the state where the
contract is executed to determine the type of indemnity that is available.
There also remains an open question as to whether an unenforceable
indemnity agreement may still qualify as an “insured contract.” See Mid-Continent Casualty Co. v. Swift Energy Co., 206 F.3d 487 (5th Cir. 2000) .
However, to avoid this dilemma, most indemnitees insist that contracts with
policyholders also have an additional insured provision. Additional insured
coverage is not dependent on a viable indemnity agreement.
Fair Notice
The majority of states also have imposed strict requirements on fair
notice for provisions involving shifting the risk of the sole negligence of one
party to another. The origin of conspicuous requirement for commercial
contracts and agreements may be found in the Uniform Commercial Code,
which has been adopted by a majority of states. Fair notice generally refers
to two requirements for shifting the risk through indemnity agreements. The
risk-shifting provision: 1) must clearly state that the party is seeking
indemnity for its own negligence from the indemnitor, and 2) the indemnity
provision must be conspicuous. See Dresser Indus tries v. Page Petroleum,
Inc. 853 S.W.2d 505 (Tex. 1993)  and Transpower Constructors v. Grand
River Dam, 905 F .2d 1413 ( 10th Cir. 1990) .
Another factor to consider is whether other insurance may be available
under the policy, even if contractual liability for the sole negligence of the
contracting party is precluded. Many commercial contracts also have
separate provisions requiring that the contracting party be endorsed as an
additional insured on the subcontractor or vendor’s policy. However, not
every party protected by an indemnity provision is also protected as an
additional insured.
For example, a company owner executes a contract for electrical work
with the policyholder subcontractor. The electrical subcontractor agrees to
indemnify the owner and other subcontractors on the job. An employee of the
electrical subcontractor is injured through the sole negligence of the
plumbing subcontractor on the job. Per public policy, the state in which the
accident occurred precludes contractual indemnity for sole negligence. The
plumbing subcontractor was not an additional insured on the electrical
contractor’s policy but was only contractually indemnified. As a result, there
may be no insurance coverage for the subcontractor because public policyprecludes the assumption of liability for damages arising from the sole
negligence of the plumbing subcontractor.
Be aware of any attempts to limit insurance coverage by the terms of the
indemnity contract. The terms and conditions of the policy will control the
coverage provided. For example, if the policyholder attempts to limit
indemnity to $500,000, t his will not affect coverage to the indemnitee, who is
also an additional insured.
Additional Insureds and Defense Costs
Because contractual liability may not pay for defense costs based only on
an indemnity provision in the contract, experienced business entities now
generally require separate provisions in a contract that also make the entity,
the general contractor, and the owner additional insureds. The difference in
insurance coverage is significant.
Consider these facts in determining the difference between additional
insured and contractual liability coverage. A large chemical plant is redoing
a section of the plant in which a two-story furnace is being refurbished. The
general contractor for the job enters into a subcontract with a pipefitting
company (the policyholder) but elects to perform the electrical work itself. A
heavy tool is accidentally droppe d by one of the general contractor’s
electricians from approximately 100 feet above  where the pipefitters are
working and severely injures one of them. The pipefitter files suit.
Who Pays First?
With only contractual liability coverage based on an indemnity provision
even for the sole negligence of the contractor, the general contractor will be
faced with paying its own defense costs unless the policyholder agrees to
defend him. Most often, the general contractor will have to pay first, and then
try to recover costs from the policyholder and/or the insurance company.As an additional insured, the story may be different. The CGL policy
states that the insurance company owes the contractor the same duty to defend
as the insurance company owes to the policyholder. Defense costs are paid
until the policy limits are exhausted by the payment of judgments or
settlements. They are in addition to payments of policy limits for indemnity
for “bodily injury” or “property damage.” The contractor as an additional
insured is now protected for both defense and indemnity by simply adding a
different risk-shifting provision to the insured contract.
Primary and Noncontributory Coverage—CG 20 01 04 13
This new endorsement amends the other insurance provisions in the CGL
policy form to make the insurance of the named insured primary and non-
contributory with any other insurance. With this endorsement on the primary
policy, it is the named insured’s policy which will provide a defense to the
additional insured and pay any damages before the additional insured’s
policy is required to pay.
However, this endorsement generally applies only at the primary level of
insurance. A review of excess and umbrella policies needs to be conducted
to determine if all of the named insured’s policies at each level are expected
to pay first in accordance with the terms of the contract.
Careful Reading of The Contract: What Is Agreed?
Indemnification/hold harmless clauses may involve the assumption of
liabilities that are not covered under the policyholder’s CGL policy. As
discussed previously, an insured may have agreed to indemnify another party
for defense costs in the contract, but those defense costs may not be covered
by the policy. However, there are other areas in which an insured, when
negotiating the terms of a commercial contract, may agree to indemnify and
hold harmless another party for those specific liabilities assumed that are not
covered by his CGL policy.Generally, a breach of contract is excluded under a CGL policy even
though a general contractor or a lessor may demand indemnity for a breach.
For example, some liability policies do not cover punitive damages.
Others are silent on the issue, but state law often prohibits insurance
coverage from paying punitive damages. In some states, courts have held that
public policy prohibits the insuring of punitive damages because it defeats
the purpose as a punishment for serious offenses.
In addition, intentional and willful conduct that usually is required before
punitive damages are assessed generally does not fall within the definition of
occurrence. They may be ruled out by the policy’s intentional injury
exclusion.
The policy may not cover claims for mental anguish unless there are
physical manifestations of the injury; claims for sexual harassment and
pollution generally fall outside the scope of CGL coverage.
These and other gaps in coverage often are discovered only after a loss,
and lead to suits against the policyholder who agreed to indemnify the other
party in the contract. The policyholder often believes it has not been properly
treated by its insurance carrier when it is left with no insurance for the very
liabilities that it thought were insured under its policy. The general contractor
who thought it was covered by the policyholder’s policy also finds itself
forced to pay costs, expenses, and damages and then having to seek recourse
in a suit for indemnity against the policyholder and insurance company.
Insurance Company Review of Contracts
Often the assumption is made that, simply because standard ISO CGL
forms have been created, all insurance carriers and agents are using them.
However, certain states still rely on older forms because of their lengthy
approval process. In addition, some states also permit manuscript
endorsements, which can change significantly the scope of coverage
provided under a CGL policy. Excess and umbrella forms, which are less
standardized than the primary CGL forms, may be called upon for coverage
even when the primary policy is not triggered.For the most part, admitted carriers in any state may be required to use
only state approved forms for CGL policies, but surplus lines carriers are not
restricted in the use of the forms that may be used to create a policy. Since
there is no set standard for CGL forms nationwide, the actual policy
provided to the named insured may or may not meet the requirements of the
named insured’s contract. A named insured may have no knowledge of
different coverage forms or different types of carriers which may offer to sell
the named insured a policy. The named insured usually discovers the policy
limitations on insurance coverage after a major loss.
Insurance companies may want to consider, as a condition precedent to
granting contractual liability coverage, that the insured provide sample
contracts to the carrier for review before activating contractual liability
coverage. Contract review can provide insurance carriers, agents, and
brokers with the oppor tunity to determine what risk is being assumed and
whether there are potential gaps in coverage before agreeing to provide
contractual liability coverage. The generic term “contractual liability
coverage” may be misleading when not all contractual liability coverage is
the same.
Failing to Add an Additional Insured
Generally, when an insured fails to comply with the contract requirement
to add an endorsement for an additional insured, the primary policy will not
provide additional insured coverage. However the Houston Court of Appeals
has determined that an umbrella policy in question filled the coverage gaps in
the primary policy. The party was not named as an additional insured on the
primary policy and, therefore, had no coverage. However, the language of the
commercial catastrophe policy was held to provide additional insured
coverage to the party because it stated that “any person or organization to
whom or to which you are obligated by virtue of a written contract to
provide such insurance as afforded by this coverage part is an insured, but
only with respect to liability arising out of ‘your work,’ ‘your product’ and to
property owned or used by you.” See American Motorist Ins. Co. v.
Occidental Chemical Corp., 16 S.W.3d 140 (Tex. App. – Houston [1st Dist.]
2000, n o pet. hist.).Therefore, although the court did not find coverage under the primary
policy because the contracting party was not an additional insured, coverage
was found under the umbrella policy. This case illustrates that careful
consideration should be given to the full scope of coverage, particularly
when the same carrier is providing both primary and umbrella coverage.
Certificate of Insurance Issues
Certificates of insurance generally are used to show the insurance
coverage that contracting parties carry. The certificate usually is provided by
an insurance agent and simply provides proof that an insurance policy has
been written, but it also may include a statement of coverage in general
terms. The format of certificates of insurance may vary from state to state,
and some contracting parties insist that their proprietary certificate forms be
used and signed by the insurance agent to indicate the terms and conditions of
coverage.
The use of certificates of insurance to commit fraud has captured the
attention of some state legislatures. These states, like Texas, have enacted
statutes to control the use and the form of certificates of insurance. Some
states only allow the use of a standard ACORD form unless the Department
of Insurance has pre-approved the use of a manuscript form. ACORD
provides standard certificates of insurance. In 2010, there were substantive
changes to the ACORD form 25 in response to challenges from state
regulatory agencies and insurance litigation.
The new form begins with some clarification of the purpose of the form
and a statement identified as “important”. This warning or disclaimer is in
capital letters to provide notice to whoever receives the form.
The form states:
THIS CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED AS A MATTER OF
INFORMATION ONLY AND CONFERS NO RIGHTS
UPON THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER. THIS CERTIFICATEDOES NOT AFFIRMATIVELY OR NEGATIVELY AMEND,
EXTEND OR ALTER THE COVERAGE AFFORDED BY
THE POLICIES BELOW. THIS CERTIFICATE OF
INSURANCE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A CONTRACT
BETWEEN THE ISSUING INSURERS(S), AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE OR PRODUCER AND THE
CERTIFICATE HOLDER.
IMPORTANT: If the certificate holder is an ADDITIONAL
INSURED, the policy(ies) must be endorsed. If
SUBROGATION IS WAIVED, subject to the terms and
conditions of the policy, certain policies may require an
endorsement. A statement on this certificate does not confer
rights to the certificate holder in lieu of such endorsement(s).
The remaining language emphasizes yet again the informative aspect of
the certificate, but a careful reading indicates that all that this certificate tells
you is what policies the insured had when the certificate was issued and for
the policy period identified. However, a policy that has been financed may
cancel for nonpayment long before the end of the policy period. Notice of
cancellation cannot be promised to the certificate holder unless the policy
explicitly provides for such notice.
The new certificate attempts to prevent litigation regarding
misrepresentations concerning the insurance that is identified on the
certificate. The broad disclaimers make reliance on the content of the
certificate unlikely unless the certificate holder has looked at the actual terms
and conditions of the policy.
Problems with Certificates of Insurance and Additional
Insured Status
The following type of situation may occur when a certificate identifies a
party as an additional insured: A tugboat company had an oral contract withan asbestos-abatement company to strip asbestos from one of its vessels.
While climbing down a ladder, an employee of the abatement company fell
onto the vessel. The employee sued the tugboat owner for negligence.
Relying on a certificate of insurance that indicated the tugboat owner as an
additional insured, the tugboat owner demanded a defense from the insurance
company of the asbestos-abatement company. The insurance company denied
coverage because the policy specifically stated that additional insured status
was only available in accordance with a written contract. Without a written
contract, there is no coverage for the tugboat owner as an additional insured
because the terms of the insurance policy take precedence over the general
representation in the certificate of insurance that the tugboat owner was an
additional insured. This reasoning is illustrated in cases such as Graceda v.
Tagle, 946 S.W.2d 504 (Tex. App. 1997, pet. denied), in which the court
ruled that a certificate of insurance alone conveys no rights on the holder of
the certificate, and American Cas. Co. of Reading. v. Krueger, 181 F.3d
1113 (9th Cir. 1999) , in which the court stated that a certificate of insurance
did not provide coverage but agency relationship may result in a claim
against the insurance company.
A survey of case law shows the problems certificates of insurance may
create. A certificate of insurance will not suffice to create insurance
coverage if such coverage is precluded by the terms of the policy. In other
words, a certificate of insurance merely shows one’s status as an insured, but
actual coverage is provided by the terms of the insurance policy. This
reasoning is seen in TIG Ins. Co. v. Sedgwick James of Washington, 184
F.Supp.2d 591, 598, 604 (S.D. Tex. 2001) , aff’d, 276 F.3d 754 (5th Cir.
2002)  (a certificate of insurance will not create insurance coverage if such
coverage is precluded by the terms of the policy); Granite Construction C o.,
Inc. v. Bituminous  Ins. Co., 832 S.W.2d 427, 430 (Tex. App. – Amarillo
1992, n .w.h.) (ruling that insurance is provided by an insurance policy, not by
a certificate of insurance); Boyd v. Travelers Ins. Co., 421 S.W.2d 929, (Tex.
Civ. App. – Houston [14th Dist.] 1967, writ ref’d n.r.e.) (mere possession of
a certificate does not constitute coverage); Wann v. Metropolitan Life Ins.
Co., 41 S.W.2d 50, 52 (Tex. Com. App.1931)  (a certificate of insurance does
“not constitute the complete contract of insurance” and must be construed in
connection with underlying insurance policy); RNA Investments, Inc. v.
Employers Ins. of Wausau, 2000 WL 1708918 (Tex. App. – Dallas 2000,n.w.h.) (certificates of insurance in and of themselves do not create insurance
coverage); C & W Well Service, Inc. v. Sebasta, 1994 WL 9568 0, at *7 (Tex.
App. – Houston [14th Dist.] 1994, n.w.h.) (insurance coverage is that
provided by a policy, and not a certificate of insurance). Thus, the courts
view that the purpose of such certificates is just to generally acknowledge
that an insurance policy has been written. The Texas Supreme Court recently
stated that given the numerous limitations and exclusions that often encumber
insurance policies, those who take insurance certificates at face value do so
at their own risk. Via Net v. TIG Ins. Co., 211 S.W.3d 310, 314 ( Tex. 2006) .
Some certificates of insurance contain broad representations of coverage
for additional insureds, including the contracting company, its subsidiaries,
and invitees. However, this broad coverage may be limited by a notation
such as “only as defined in ‘the contract’ between the insured and the
contracting company.” So, for example, even if the certificate represents that
there is coverage for all subcontractors, if the contract itself does not require
such extensive additional insured status, there will be no coverage. This
reasoning is seen in Granite Construction Co., Inc. v. Bituminous  Ins. Co.,
832 S.W.2d 427 (Tex. App. 1992, no writ) and J.A. Jones Construction Co.
v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 645 N.E.2d 980 (Ill. App. Ct. 1995) , in which the
court held that a certificate is not evidence of policy coverage when the
certificate is subject to the terms of the policy. See also Benns v. Continental
Cas. Co., 982 F.2d 461 (10th Cir. 1993)  and Great Lakes Dredge & Dock
Co. v. Commercial Union Assur. Co., 2000 WL 769782 at *4 (N.D. Ill. Oct.
4, 1999) .
Therefore, the policy itself and the contract between the parties may have
a chilling effect on representations made in a certificate of insurance about
additional insured status.
Disclaimers on the certificate may protect an insurance company and
agent from claims of negligent misrepresentation, particularly when the claim
of the owner or general contractor is that they “justifiably relied on the
certificate,” as seen in T.H.E. Ins. Co. case, which shows that there is no
justifiable reliance when the two disclaimers discussed previously appear on
the face of the certificate. However, a certificate of insurance withoutdisclaimers may pose a serious problem for an insurance company or an
agent on a negligent misrepresentation claim.
Best Practices for Getting the Right Insurance for the
Insured and the Additional Insured
Certificates of insurance are only to be used for general information. In
every case where there is a complex indemnity provision in a contract, a
request should be made for a copy of the actual policy.
If the potential additional insured receives the actual policy, the
additional insured endorsements can be reviewed and issues of coverage can
be remedied before a loss. The actual policy can assure the contracting party
that it is receiving the coverage he expected as an additional insured.
The insurance agent plays a key role in obtaining copies of the policies
for the insured. If there is a question of coverage this should be raised in
writing to the underwriter and resolved before the work begins on the
contract.
Some courts have held that an insurance agent does not have an
affirmative duty to disclose limitations of insurance coverage. The court
upheld a lower court’s ruling that an agent did not have a duty to disclose
limitations in coverage in Moore v. Whitney-Vahy Ins. Agency, 966 S.W.2d
690 (Tex. App. – San Antonio 1998, no pet.), a suit involving a lack of
coverage for a retaliatory discharge claim. The client had not requested that
specific type of coverage and the agent had not misrepresented the coverage
provided in the policy he obtained. In Brinkerhoff v. Campbell, 994 P.2d 911
(Wash. Ct. App. 2000) , the court reasoned that an insurance company did not
have an affirmative duty to disclose policy limits in an auto claim, although
the claimant’s attorney did have a responsibility to ask the company for the
information.
Therefore, reviewing the actual policy for the controlling terms and
conditions of coverage may afford the greatest protection for a potentialadditional insured. The insured or the potential additional insured should
review the coverage and ask questions if the coverage is in doubt.
Conclusion
The scope of coverage in a CGL policy can be greatly expanded when
taking into consideration broad based additional insured endorsements and
contractual liability coverage. There is a growing trend to limit the scope of
coverage for additional insureds and contractual liability coverage by the
2004 and 2013 ISO endorsements. The intent is to restrict coverage to
vicarious liability only. These endorsements will be the source of continued
insurance litigation as to the scope of coverage provided. Certificates of
insurance also can affect what the policyholder and the parties contracting
with the policyholder envision as potential insurance coverage. The trend is
to generally limit certificates of insurance to basic information about the type
of policy, name of the insured, limits, and policy periods. More than thirty-
nine states have adopted statutes or regulations to limit the use of certificates
of insurance. Some of the litigation and confusion that results from poorly
worded endorsements, indemnity clauses of commercial contracts, and
certificates of insurance can be avoided if the agents, brokers, insurance
companies, underwriters, and pol icyholders carefully consider the losses that
may arise as a result of the expanded coverage. This evaluation should occur
when the insurance program is procured so that everyone involved in the
insurance program understands the risks involved and the issues related to
the coverage that is extended to additional insureds and contractual partners.One Occurrence, Two
Occurrences . . .
SECTION III
By: Michael F. Aylward, Esq.
An industrial plant explosion causes damage to several adjacent property
owners . . . an alleged defect in the design of a PVC pipe product causes
plumbing systems around the country to leak . . . an archdiocese is sued for
its negligent failure to protect parishioners from the sexual depredation of a
priest . . . a municipal housing authority faces a class action for refusing to
rent to African Americans . . . a food wholesaler negligently processes
ground beef, which causes fast food customers in several states to suffer food
poisoning.
What do all of these cases have in common? Each presents the question
of whether claims arising from them should be treated as arising from
separate occurrences or whether the claims share a common cause and,
therefore, trigger only a single occurrence limit.
Few issues can have as dramatic an impact on an insured’s coverage
rights (and an insurer’s duty to pay) as the determination of whether a given
set of claims involve one occurrence or many. Yet, the rules pertaining to this
issue are cloaked in obscurity and difficult to follow. Indeed, few areas of
the law seem as result-oriented as this one.
Until recently, cases involving multiple occurrences have been relatively
rare. The rarity stems not so much from the obscurity of the issue as from the
constellation of circumstances that must come together to produce such a
case. Specifically, 1) the insurer must be found to owe coverage, 2) the
insured must be liable, 3) the damages in question must be large, and 4) theclaims must not be able to be settled within the limits that the insurer
concedes are available.
Most often, disputes arise over which, if any, aggregate should be
eroded; when excess or umbrella liability coverage should be pierced;
whether single or multiple insured retentions should be applied; when the
duty to defend ends; and whether the insured’s coverage should be
maximized. While such disputes typically focus on policy limits, some recent
cases have featured efforts by insureds to separate out new occurrences to
avoid defenses of late notice or having “expected or intended” the original
occurrence.
Unlike occurrence disputes over cases involving the application of
policy exclusions, there is no clear right or wrong position on the number of
occurrences that reliably will benefit a party. The analysis that maximizes an
insured’s indemnity recovery in one case may be devastating to an insured
with a different profile. Similarly, the position that an insurer might favor in a
case in which its policies are primary might be unfavorable to it in another
case in which it issued excess policies. Such shifting roles and complications
may well explain the relatively small number of reported decisions.
Indemnity issues also are transforming the cast of characters in coverage
disputes. Whereas coverage disputes conventionally have pitted primary
insurers against policyholders, disputes concerning the number of
occurrences may arise in suits between 1) a policyholder and its primary
insurers, 2) a primary insurer and an umbrella or excess insurer, or 3) a
ceding insurer and its reinsurer(s).
Although the thrust of this section is on commercial general liability
(CGL) policies, some of the examples and case citations deal with excess
liability coverages. However, even when coverage on the primary liability
policy is excluded, the definition of occurrence is important in determining
when and how excess coverage is triggered as well as how self-insured
retentions and deductibles are applied.
The Role of Occurrence WordingsLimiting Coverage
The meaning of occurrence is vital to the two main promises in a liability
insurance policy: the promise to pay damages on behalf of the insured,
whether through judgments or agreed-to settlements (the duty to indemnify),
and the promise to defend suits seeking covered damages (the duty to
defend). While broadly stated, neither obligation is without limitation; since
1966, most general liability policies have provided that that the insurer’s
obligation to defend ends when the applicable policy limits are exhausted.
This is one situation in which the issue of how many occurrences are
triggered can be critical.
Trigger of Coverage Distinguished
An occurrence can play several roles in a CGL policy. Traditionally,
general liability policies are triggered by an occurrence that results in bodily
injury or property damage during the policy period. The coverage grant in the
current ISO CGL form (CG 00 01)  provides that coverage only applies if:
1)    the bodi ly injury or property damage is caused by an occurrence that
takes place in the coverage territory; and
2)    the bodi ly injury or property damage occurs during the policy period.
Occurrence also measures the insurer’s indemnity obligations that affect
when the insurer’s duty to defend is exhausted. Looking back to the 1973
comprehensive general liability form, the policy provided that:
all bodily injury and property damage arising out of
continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same
general conditions shall be considered as arising out of one
occurrence.
More recent ISO forms have tweaked this language slightly, defining
occurrence as “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure to
substantially the same general harmful conditions.”While this dual usage sometimes has created confusion, an occurrence is
not the trigger of coverage under a liability policy. Broadly stated, an
occurrence is the source or cause of the insured’s liabilities. By contrast, it is
the effect of that occurrence that triggers coverage. In short, the cause of the
insured’s liability determines the number of occurrences, but that cause does
not trigger coverage under an occurrence policy. Coverage is triggered by
bodily injury or property damage. Thus, it is the effect of the insured’s
negligence that determines which policies are triggered, not the date of the
original causative negligence that set a train of events in motion that
culminated in those injuries. The difference between the occurrence and its
effects can be seen in different types of cases.
In some cases, cause and effect will coincide, as in the negligent
operation of a motor vehicle. Such is not the case, however, if the cause of
the auto accident was the negligent design of the vehicle by the auto
manufacturer or negligence by a garage in adjusting the brakes of the vehicle.
In these cases, the insured’s negligence could antedate the injury-causing
accident by months or even years.
A similar lag in time between negligent conduct and resulting injuries
often occurs in product liability cases. For instance, in Whittaker Corp. v.
Allianz Underwriters, 14 Cal. Rptr. 2d 659 (1992) , a soft drink producer
was sued for injuries resulting from exploding containers. Ruling that the
cause of these injuries was the insured’s decision to change the process by
which its bottles were manufactured, the trial court held that coverage was
triggered when the formula was changed. This ruling was overturned on
appeal. While concurring that the insured’s decision to change its product
formulation caused the ensuing products liability claims, the Second District
held that the policies were triggered by the bodily injury. Since injuries did
not occur until the manufactured products actually left the premises, which
did not occur until the next policy year, the appeals court held that only those
policies in effect when the explosions took place were triggered, not the
policies that were in place when the process was changed.
This is not to say that the issue of trigger is entirely removed from
determining how many policy limits may be implicated by a given claim or
set of claims. A claim that is deemed to trigger coverage through either amanifestation or actual injury approach generally is more likely to tap into
only a single policy limit. Conversely, those jurisdictions that follow a
continuous injury or injury in fact approach are more likely to permit an
insured to recover a separate occurrence limit in each policy year during
which injury occurs.
Policy Wordings and Occurrences Determinations
Indemnity Limits
The limits of the insurer’s indemnity obligation generally are set forth in
the policy declarations. For instance, a policy may provide that coverage is
afforded for $1 million each occurrence, $2 million in the general aggregate,
and $1 million for the products-completed operations aggregate. These terms
are significant because the CGL form’s definition of occurrence states that:
Occurrence means an accident, including continuous or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful
conditions.
Some policies contain event or happening language that is more
commonly found in reinsurance agreements and permits the aggregation of a
series of related acts. For example, in Owens Illinois, Inc. v. United
Insurance Co., 625 A.2d 1 (N.J. Super. 1993)  reversed on other grounds ,
650 A .2d 974 ( N.J. 1994) , policy provisions treating “a series of interrelated
acts” were considered to be one “occurrence.”
The insurer’s obligation to pay damages on account of a covered
occurrence is capped by the amount stated in the declarations. In the event
that other claims are made against the insured, the insurer may owe a further
policy limit (and an accompanying duty to defend) unless the additional
claims arise out of the same occurrence for which the insurer has paid its
limit. Some also may be subject to a policy aggregate or some other
indemnity limitation.Definition of Occurrence
CGL policies have typically provided that “bodily injury and property
damage arising out of continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the
same general conditions shall be considered as arising out of one
occurrence.” For the most part, courts have ruled that “conditions” are those
that physically cause injury, not negligent acts or omissions that merely set
the stage for such losses to occur, such as an insured’s failure to warn about a
dangerous condition in its products or a failure to prevent injuries from
occurring on its premises.
In Koikos v. Travelers Insurance Company , 849 So.2d 263 (Fla. 2003) ,
the Florida Supreme Court held that a restaurant’s failure to prevent a gang
shoot-out that injured several patrons had more than a single “cause.” The
court refused to find that the “continuous and repeated exposure to
conditions” language was relevant in considering the acts or omissions of the
policyholder for which it was deemed to be legally responsible, ruling
instead that this language was intended to broaden the scope of earlier
coverage so as to clearly afford coverage for incidents in which injuries
resulted from environmental exposures or other conditions that occurred over
an extended period of  time:
We conclude that the inclusion of the “continuous or repeated exposure”
language does not restrict the definition of “occurrence” but rather
expands it by including ongoing and slowly developing injuries, such as
those in the field of toxic torts. Therefore, we reject Travelers’ reliance
on the “continuous or repeated exposure” language as a basis for
concluding that Koikos’ negligent failure to provide security constitutes
a single occurrence under the terms of the policy. The victims were not
“exposed” to the negligent failure to provide security. If the victims
were “exposed” to anything, it was the bullets fired from the intruder’s
gun.
In London Market Insurers v. Superior Court of Los Angeles County,
146 Cal. App. 4th 648; 53 Cal. Rptr. 3d 154 (2d Dist. 2007) , the California
Court of Appeal rejected a primary insurer’s contention that a product
manufacturer’s sale of asbestos products fell within the “continuous orrepeated exposure to conditions” language. The court concluded that the
failure to protect claimants from asbestos was not a “condition,” but the
condition was, rather, the asbestos fibers to which the underlying claimants
were exposed. See also Fina, Inc. v. Travelers Ind. Co., 184 F.Supp.2d 547
(N.D. Tex. 2002) (rejecting Travelers’ argument that insured’s failure to
protect its employees was a “continuous or repeated exposure to
conditions”).
The First Department of the Appellate Division of the New York
Supreme Court ruled in Ramirez v. Allstate Ins. Co., 2006 NY Slip Op
01356 (App. Div. 2006) , that separate claims brought by two infant children
who were exposed to lead dust inside the insured’s apartment building were
subject to the same occurrence limit as presenting claims for bodily injury
“resulting from continuous or repeated exposure to the same general
conditions.” See also, Accord Allstate Ins. Co. v. Bonn, 2010 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 43178 (D.R.I. May 3, 2010)(the children’s exposure to lead paint in
the insured’s apartment share the same cause as arising out of continuous or
repeated exposure to the same conditions, namely the presence of lead in the
premises).
The court ruled in Western World Ins. Co. v. Wilkie, 5:06-cv-64
(E.D.N.C. November 1, 2007)  that injuries suffered by various children who
came into contact with fecal matter while petting animals at the insured’s
petting zoo over the course of a week arose out of exposure to the same
general harmful conditions (the presence of e. coli at the zoo).
Despite an insurer’s argument that the building complex had suffered
water damage through various different means and therefore involved
multiple “occurrences,” Division One of the Washington Court of Appeals
ruled in Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, London v. Valiant Ins. Co., 155
Wash. App. 469, 229 P.3d 930 (2010) that the gradual intrusion of water into
the building over a five year period involved “continued or repeated
exposure to substantially similar conditions” and was therefore only the
product of a single “occurrence.” Ongoing discharges of dust from the
insured’s recycling operations were held to involve “continuous exposure or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general harmful conditions”
despite the plaintiff’s argument in Stonelight Tile, Inc. v. CaliforniaInsurance Guaranty Association, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d 74, 150 Cal. App. 4th 19
(2007)  that there were different types of exposure so as to warrant a finding
of separate “occurrences.”
Rejecting arguments by the policyholder and excess insurers that each
individual asbestos claimant is a new occurrence as well as the argument of
the primary insurer that all of the underlying asbestos claims were a single
occurrence, a federal district court ruled in LSJ Technologies, Inc. v. U.S.
Fire Ins. Co., No. 2:07-CV-399 (E.D. Tex. September 2, 2010)  that
individual claimants could be grouped together as one occurrence if they
were all exposed to asbestos-containing gaskets at the same time and
location so as to have been exposed to “substantially the same general
conditions.”
Courts have also refused to find that the “conditions” language supports
the aggregation of multiple claims on the basis of a pattern of conduct. See
H.E. Butt Grocery Company  v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh,
150 F .3d 526, 533 ( 5th Cir. 1988) (refusing to combine two sexual assaults on
two different children into one occurrence despite the fact that both claims
were predicated on the insured employer’s negligence in failing to prevent
assault by pedoph ilic employee); See also, American Red Cross v. Travelers
Ind. Co. of Rhode  Island, 816 F. Supp. 755, 761 (D. DC 1993) (refusing to
treat insured’s “general, negligent practice in handling HIV-contaminated
blood”  as cause).
Aggregates
Prior to the 1986 edition of the CGL policy, few liability policies
contained general aggregates. Even today, many general liability forms
restrict aggregates to claims falling within the completed operations or
products hazards or to risks that are underwritten on a remuneration basis.
See Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co., 15 P.3d 115 (Wash.
2000) , which noted that the underlying policy aggregate was restricted to
claims for products and occupational disease.Completed Operations and Products Hazards
The 1973 form defines products hazard as including:
bodily injury and property damage arising out of the named
insured’s products or reliance upon a representation or
warranty made at any time with respect thereto, but only if
the bodily injury or property damage occurs away from
premises owned by or rented to the named insured and after
physical possession of such products has been relinquished
to others.
In short, this hazard extends only to suits in which the plaintiff was
injured by the insured’s product after the insured had relinquished physical
control over it. Injuries that occurred while a product was still being
installed were therefore not subject to this aggregate limitation. For example,
see Frontier Insulation Contractors, Inc. v. Merchants Mutual Ins. Co., 91
N.Y.2d 169 ( 1997) , which deals with asbestos claims.
The completed operations hazard performs a similar function for
contractors that the products hazard fulfills for manufacturers. In addition to
the question of the location of injury, this hazard requires that the injury take
place after the contractor’s work at a given location has been completed.
Current forms continue these distinctions from premises hazards, even though
products and completed ope rations are combined within one definition.
Occupational Disease
Employer’s liability and some general liability policies also contain
language setting an indemnity limit for all occupational disease claims
against the insured. Such policies typically state:
The Company’s liability shall be further limited to the
[aggregate amount] stated with respect to all ultimate net lossbecause of personal injury which occurs during each annual
period while this policy is in force commencing from its
effective date and which arises out of occupational diseases
of employees of the insured.
Occupational disease is a term that long has been used in Federal
Employers’ Liability Act (FELA) and workers compensation case law to
describe certain types of employment-related injuries that have two
characteristics: 1) the impairment must be caused by employment, and 2) the
impairment must gradually result from exposure to conditions of work over
an extended period of time. These characteristics are explained in cases such
as Urie v. Thompson, 337 U .S. 163 ( 1949) .
Premium Bases: Remuneration and Otherwise
The 1973 policy provided for an aggregate limit to apply when premium
was quoted on a remuneration basis. Remuneration (payroll) can be
contrasted with the other standard measures of premium, such as square
footage, receipts, or frontage.
In Allstate v. Dana Corp. 737 N.E.2d 1177 (Ind. App. 2000) , the Indiana
Court of Appeals refused to find that remuneration language was ambiguous,
noting that a definition in the policy made clear that “operations rated on a
remuneration” basis meant “a business’ facilities or activities whose
policies are rated according to the compensation paid to the insured’s
owners and employees.” Inasmuch as the excess policies were written on a
sales basis, and not remuneration, the court ruled that the excess policies did
not contain aggregate limits.
Earlier Aggregate Wordings
Prior to the emergence of the CGL policy as the dominant policy form in
the early 1970s , many liability policies provided for separate policy
aggregates for operations, contractual, protective, and products coverage
areas. The limits language in these older “accident” forms provided that:Limits of Liability: Products
The limits of bodily injury liability or property damage
liability stated in the declarations as “aggregate products” are
respectively the total limits of the company’s liability for all
damages arising out of the products hazard. All such
damages arising out of one prepared or acquired lot of goods
or products shall be considered as arising out of an accident.
Limits of Liability: Operations
The limits of property damage liability stated in the
declarations as “aggregate operations” is the total limit
of the company’s liability for all damages arising out
of injury to or destruction of property, including the
loss of use thereof, caused by the ownership,
maintenance or use of premises or operations rated
upon a remuneration premium basis or by contractors
equipment rated on a receipts premium basis.
Limits of Liability: Protective
The limits of property damage liability stated in the declarations as
“aggregate protective” is the total limit of the company’s liability
for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property,
including the loss of use thereof, caused by operations performed
for the named insured by independent contractors or omissions or
supervisory acts of the insured in connection therewith, except
maintenance or ordinary alterations and repairs on premises
owned or rented by the named insured.
Limits of Liability: ContractualThe limits of property damage liability stated in the declarations as
“aggregate contractual” is the total limit of the company’s
liability for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of
property, including the loss of use thereof, with respect to each
contract.
These limits apply separately to each project with respect to
operations being performed away from premises owned or
rented by the named insured.
Some also allowed aggregation on the basis of “continuous or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general condition existing at
or emanating from one premises location.” Although these forms were
used years ago, they are of continued significance in recent
environmental cases. See London Market Insurers v. Superior Court of
Los Angeles County, 146 Cal. App. 4th 648, 53 Cal. Rptr. 3d 154 (2d
Dist. 2007) .
Stacking and Anti-stacking Clauses
Stacking
In many states, even a single occurrence may trigger multiple policy
limits to the extent that the jurisdiction recognizes a continuous trigger
of coverage. The insured may recover a separate occurrence limit in
each successive year for which bodily injury or property damage is
shown to have occurred. In Range r Ins. Co. v. Safety-Kleen Corp., 814
F. Supp. 744 (N.D. Ill. 1993) , a worker’s exposure to solvents was held
to trigger occurrence limits in successive years over which leukemia
developed. In Allstate v. Dana Corp., 737 N.E.2d 1177 (Ind. App.
2000) , contamination involved only one occurrence but triggered new
indemnity limits in successive policies.
In State of California v. Continental Ins. Co., 281 P.3d 1000 (Cal.
2012) , the California Supreme Court ruled that the limits of successiveliability insurance policies could be stacked to satisfy the state’s legal
obligations with respect to the cleanup of the infamous Stringfellow
Acid Pits Superfund site. Whereas it had earlier ruled that under an “all
sums” analysis an insured could designate a single carrier to pay its loss
leaving that insurer free to seek contribution from other insurers whose
policies might be applicable, the Supreme Court held in this case that
where a single policy year was inadequate to satisfy the insured loss,
successive years of coverage could be stacked together. The court
declared that, “The all sums with stacking rule means that the insured
has immediate access to the insurance it purchased. It does not put the
insured in the position of receiving less coverage than it bought. It also
acknowledges the uniquely progressive nature of long-tail injuries that
cause progressive damage throughout multiple policy periods.” The
court left the door open to insurers to adopt anti-stacking provisions in
the future but declared that under the policies at issue in this case,
stacking was permitted.
This is not uniformly the rule, however. In particular, a number of
courts have ruled that if there is only one occurrence, the insured is not
entitled to more than a single policy limit. To the extent that the
occurrence takes place over the span of several years, the available
indemnity will be prorated in proportion to the total limits for the years
in question. Therefore, if the insured is forced to pay $1 million for loss
that occurred over a ten-year period, each policy year will contribute
$100,000.
This rule has been followed in several leading asbestos cases.
Indeed, both of the federal circuit rulings that respectively devised the
exposure and triple trigger approaches to the trigger issue cautioned
that the insured should not be permitted to stack separate limits for the
same occurrence. See Keene v. INA, 667 F.2d 1034 (D.C. Cir. 1981)
and INA v. Forty-Eight Insulations, Inc., 633 F.2d 1212 (6th Cir.
1980) . In Lafarge Corp. v. Hartford Ins. Co., 61 F.3d 389 (5th Cir.
1995)  overruled on other grounds , 241 F. 3d 396 (5th Cir. Tex. 2001) ,
the court ruled that the insurer’s deductible must be prorated in the same
manner as loss is apportioned among respective years of coverage.Likewise, the Appellate Court of the New York Supreme Court
ruled in In Re Liquidation of Midland Ins. Co., 709 N.Y.S.2d 24 (N.Y.
App. Div. 2000)  that even though a loss may occur over a period of
twenty years, the most that an insurer should owe is the single
occurrence limit. “Otherwise, an insurer that issued a $1 million
liability policy renewed twenty times could find itself liable for $20
million in damage claims for the same injury,” said the court. The court
declared that “our reading of the policy at issue indicates that the
purpose of defining all exposure as one occurrence is to make clear that
only one deductible will apply and that the limit of liability, where an
insurer has issued renewal policies, should be the policy limits for one
policy, rather than the aggregate for all policies issued.” Similar
reasoning also is found in Garcia v. Physicians Insurance Exchange ,
876 S.W.2d 842 (Tex. 1994) , in which the Texas Supreme Court ruled
in a medical malpractice case that an insured could not recover more
than a single occurrence limit for any given occurrence, regardless of
the trigger theory that applied.
Anti-Stacking Terms: Noncumulation and Deemer
Clauses
Unlike automobile liability forms, which now contain language
specifically addressing policyholder efforts to stack limits, CGL
policies do not contain specific anti-stacking language. Nevertheless,
some policies, notably those issued by Liberty Mutual in earlier years,
contained non-cumulation or deemer clauses that are claimed by
insurers to have a similar anti-stacking effect.
Non-cumulation and deemer clauses are intended to prevent
policyholders from stacking successive limits where an occurrence
results in continuing damage during more than one policy issued by that
insurance company. Certain policies contain endorsements stipulating
that the insurer shall not owe more than a single limit even if the insured
is entitled to claim coverage under multiple policies. An example of this
wording is:Injury, damage or loss might be covered by this policy and also by
other policies issued to you by us or any affiliate. When these
other policies contain a provision similar to this one, the amount
we will pay is limited. The maximum that we will pay under all
such policies combined is the highest limit that applies in any one
of these policies.
Several courts have relied on such clauses to limit an insured’s
recovery in a pollution case to a single policy limit, even in “continuous
injury” jurisdictions. See Hercules, Inc. v. AIU Insurance Company ,
784 A.2d 481 (Del. 2001) ; Endicott Johns on Corporation v. Liberty
Mutual Ins. Co., 928 F.Supp. 176, 180 (N.D.N.Y. 1996) ; and O-I
Brockway Glass Container, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 1994 WL
910935 (D.N.J. February 9, 1994) . But see Great Lakes Dredge and
Dock Company  v. The City of Chicago, 57 F. Supp.2d 525 (N.D. Ill.
1999)  (ruling that successive policies are triggered by flooding claims
despite non-cumulation clauses).
The Appellate Court of Illinois ruled in Illinois Central Railroad v.
Acc. & Cas. Co. of Winterthur, 739 N.E.2d 1049 (1st Dist. 2000)  that a
“deemer” clause in a CGL policy is only meant to apply in cases where
an individual suffered injury in more than one policy, in which event the
occurrence was assignable to the policy in which the first material
damage took place.
The Delaware Supreme Court ruled in Stonewall Ins. Co. v. E.I. Du
Pont De Nemours & Co., 996 A.2d 1254 (Del. 2010)  that a non-
cumulation clause clearly was intended to reduce the available limits by
the total amounts paid or due to the insured from earlier excess carriers.
However, the court rejected Stonewall’s contention that the word “loss”
in this clause referred to the entire loss at issue and not merely those
claims involving this policy. The court distinguished those claims that
might involve multiple years of damage as oppos ed to those attributable
to only a single year. The court also pointed out that Delaware follows
an “all-sums” approach wherein the insured is restricted to a single
tower of coverage allowing those carriers to seek contribution from
insurers in other years. The court ruled that in light of the “in whole orin part” language of the non-cumulation clause, amounts payable to Du
Pont that covered the entire loss would reduce Stonewall’s liability, but
where the amounts paid by prior excess carriers only covered part of
the loss, then Stonewall’s coverage applied to the remaining portion.
The Third Circuit ruled in a Pennsylvania case that a “non-
cumulation” clause limited an excess insurer’s duty to pay asbestos
claims to a single policy limit despite the fact that the underlying
policy’s duty to pay would otherwise have been triggered each year that
it had been written between 1975 and 1983. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v.
Treesdale, Inc., 418 F.3d 330 (3rd Cir. 2005) . In keeping with
Treesdale, in Greene Tweed & Co., Inc. v. Hartford Acc. & Ind., No.
03-3637 (E.D. Pa. April 21, 2006), the court refused to find ambiguity
in a “non-cumulation” clause in the American Home umbrella policies
despite the insurer’s objection that this clause was linked to “loss” in
contrast to the occurrence language construed by the Third Circuit in
Treesdale. Nevertheless, the court refused to give effect to this clause,
finding that it was an unenforceable escape clause contrary to
Pennsylvania law. Whereas “excess” clauses may be given effect,
clauses that purport to entirely defeat coverage are unenforceable. The
court also expressed concern that this might result in higher layer excess
insurers being able to avoid coverage since this policy was not
exhausted and archly noted that the Third Circuit had not even
addressed this issue in Treesdale.
New York’s highest court has upheld a non-cumulation clause in a
lead paint poisoning case. In Hiraldo v. Allstate Ins. Co., 5 N.Y.3d 508,
840 N.E.2d 451 (2005) , the New York Court of Appeals held that a
landlord’s liability insurer’s obligation to pay damages on account of a
tenant’s lead poisoning claims was limited to a single policy limit even
though the insurer had issued three separate policies during the period
of the child’s injury. While suggesting that the stacking issue would
ordinarily have been difficult to resolve, the court held that in this case
the issue was settled by a “non-cumulation clause” in the policy stating
that “regardless of the number of insured persons, injured persons,
claims, claimants, or policies involved, our total liability under
Business Liability Protection coverage for damages resulting from oneloss will not exceed the limit of liability for coverage x shown on the
declarations page. All bodily injury, personal injury and property
damage resulting from one accident or from continuous or repeated
exposure to the same general conditions is considered the result of one
loss.” As a result, the court concluded that Allstate had fully satisfied its
liability through the payment of its $300,000 limit in a court
notwithstanding the fact that three of its policies were potentially
triggered by the child’s lead poi soning.
On the whole, courts that follow an “all sums” approach seem more
likely to give effect to non-cumulation clauses in long-tail cases,
perhaps on the theory that the existence of such clauses is a refutation of
the insurers’ position that the policies impliedly require “time on the
risk” allocation. Chicago Bridge & Iron Co. v. Certain Underwriters
at Lloyd’s, 59 Mass. App. Ct. 646, 797 N.E.2d 424 (2003) . Conversely,
some states that permit allocation, such as New Jersey, have held that
the principles underlying non-cumulation are incompatible with pro
rata allocation and that insurers should not be allowed to rely on non-
cumulation clauses to reduce the “pro rata” exposure applicable to any
individual year. See Spaul ding Composites Company , Inc. v. Aetna
Cas. & Sur. Co., 176 N .J. 25, 819 A .2d 410 ( 2003) .
Batch Clauses
A “batch clause” states that all losses involving a single lot or batch
of the insured’s products will be treated as one “occurrence.” “Batch
clauses” date back more than fifty years and were formerly a standard
part of CGL forms before 1966.
In Home Ins. Co. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 528 F.2d 1388
(2nd Cir. 1976) , Diamond Shamrock sought coverage for losses
involving a super-concentrated Vitamin D3 resin that it produced at a
plant in New Jersey. As a result of production errors at the New Jersey
plant, however, two lots of inactive super-concentrated Vitamin D3
resin were produced, mixed with corn oil and antioxidants, and shipped
to Diamond’s plant in Kentucky where they were sprayed onto corn cobfractions to make four lots of “Nopde x 200,”  a livestock food
supplement which was sold to Central Soya Corporation to be included
in their chicken feed product. In turn, Central Soya sold the feed to
numerous chicken farmers who later reported that their chickens had
died or been injured as the result of ingesting defective feed.
During the period in question, the general liability policy issued to
Diamond Shamrock by Aetna provided coverage up to $250,000 per
occurrence with a $100,000 “per occurrence” deductible. The term
occurrence was defined as meaning, “an accident, including continuous
or repeated exposure to conditions, which results in bodily injury or
property damage neither expected nor intended from the standpoint of
the insured.” An endorsement to the policy set forth the following “batch
clause” stating that, “As respects product liability for property damage
coverage, all such damage arising out of one lot of goods  or products
prepared or acquired by the named insured or by another trading under
its name shall be considered as arising out of one occurrence.” In
addition to this primary policy, Home issued a $3 million excess policy
over the Aetna coverage.
A dispute arose among the parties with respect to the number of
occurrences. Home argued that there were four occurrences, one for
each of the “Nopde x 200”  lots that had been created at the Diamond
Shamrock plant in Kentucky and sold to Central Soya. Home pointed to
the fact that this was the last act over which the insured had any control
and was the basis for its liability. Diamond Shamrock and Aetna argued
that there were only two occurrences, one for each of the two New
Jersey lots of Vitamin D3 resin.
Both parties submitted legal arguments and affidavits concerning the
history of the “batch clause” and the alleged custom and understanding
of the insurance industry with respect to its scope. The U.S. District
Court in New York excluded this extrinsic evidence, however, holding
that conclusory statements as to intent were irrelevant and granted
summary judgment for Home. On review, however, the Second Circuit
held that the District Court erred in failing to take into account thecustom in the insurance industry concerning the meaning of “batch
clauses” and remanded the case for further findings.
Issues with respect to “batch clauses” also surfaced in the context of
Agent Orange claims two decades ago. Thus, in Diamond Sham rock
Chemicals v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 609 A.2d 167 (1992) , the
Appellate Division of the New Jersey Supreme Court refused to find
that the “batch clause” in Aetna’s policy applied, holding instead that it
only extended to problems involving manufacturing defects, not design
errors. The court found that the intent of the “batch clause” was to
maximize the available insurance coverage by preventing the stacking of
policy deductibles for each batch of defectively manufactured product.
While the court conceded that nothing in the policy itself required a
distinction between manufacturing and design defects, it found that this
analysis was consistent with the above -stated intent to use the “batch
clause” to maximize coverage rather than limiting it.
Not all courts have recognized this distinction between
manufacturing and design claims with respect to the intended
application of “batch clauses”, however. For instance, in Ruthart v.
Underwriters at Lloyd’s London , Suffolk No. 91-7877 (Mass. Super.
March 12, 1998) , the State Insurance Commissioner brought suit against
the reinsurers of the now-insolvent American Mutual Liability Insurance
Company to recover sums allegedly owed as the result of AMLICO’s
settlement of numerous underlying asbestos liability claims. The court
ruled that the claims involved separate “occurrences” and that the
claims were subject to separate “batch clause” retentions in certain of
the treaties, rejecting the Insurance Commissioner’s argument on behalf
of AMLICO that such clauses are inapplicable to cases involving
“design defects” or inherently dangerous products.
Likewise, in E.R. Squibb & Sons , Inc. v. Accident and Casualty
Ins. Co., (S.D. February 1997) , the court ruled that various DES claims
against E.R. Squibb were subject to a “batch clause.” Notwithstanding
the Appellate Division’s ruling in Diamond Sham rock, the court agreed
with London underwriters that such clauses were applicable to designdefect claims and should therefore limit the number of occurrences
presented by the underlying DES actions.
In London Market Insurers v. Supe rior Court of Los Angeles
County, 146 Cal. App. 4th 648; 53 Cal. Rptr. 3d 154 (2007) , the
California Court of Appeal held that asbestos liability claims had not
arisen out of a single lot of goods  or products under various early CGL
policies, as there was no evidence that all of the asbestos claims
derived from a single lot of the insured’s products. The court declined
to limit this language to claims involving design defects, declaring that
it had equal applicability to non-conforming products. The court
rejected the contrary analysis adopted by the Appellate Court in
Diamond Sham rock in 1992.
Annualization: Multi-Year Policies
Courts have reached conflicting conclusions with respect to whether
policies containing three-year limits should be interpreted as involving
only a single policy limit or otherwise. Most three-year policies contain
an annualization clause that states that the policy limit is refreshed on an
annual basis. For instance, Insurance Services Office (ISO) policies
commonly provide the following wording:
The Limits of Insurance of this Coverage Part apply separately to
each consecutive annual period and to any remaining period of
less than 12 m onths. . .
In the absence of an annualization clause, several courts have ruled
that the policy limits stretch over the entire term and are not separately
available in each year of the policy term. Examples of this reasoning
can be found in Society of Roman Catholic Church of Diocese of
Lafayette, Inc. v. Interstate Fire and Cas. Co., 126 F.3d 727 (5th Cir.
1997) ; Diamond Sham rock Chemicals Co. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co.,
609 A.2d 440 (N.J. Super. 1992) , disapproved by 629 A. 2d 885 (N.J.
Sup. 1992) ; Hercules, Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 1998 WL 962089
(Del. Super. September 30, 1998) ; CSX Transportation, Inc. v.Commercial Union Ins. Co., 82 F.3d 478 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ; Air
Produc ts and Chemical, Inc. v. Hartford Accident and Ind. Co., 1989
WL 73656 (E.D. Pa. June 30, 1989) ; Asten Johns on v. Columbia Cas.
Co., No. 03-1552 (E.D. Pa. March 30, 2007)  and Outboard Marine
Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 670 N.E.2d 740 (Ill. App. 1996) ,
appe al denied, 675 N.E.2d 634 (Ill. 1996) . But see Chemical Lehman
Tank Lines, Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 978 F. Supp. 589 (D.N.J.
1997)  reversed on other grounds , 177 F.3d 210 (3rd Cir. 1999)  and
Mennen Company v. Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co., No. 93-CIV-5273
(D.N.J. October 20, 1999) .
In California Ins. Co. v. Stimson Lumber Co., 2004 WL 1173185
(D. Or. May 26, 2004) , a lumber manufacturer sought coverage for
various claims arising out of an exterior hardwood siding product. In
2004, the federal district court gave effect to a “prior insurance non-
cumulation of liability” provision in the National Union policies which
stated that if a “loss” covered under the policy was also covered in
whole or in part under any earlier excess policy, the amounts due would
be reduced by the amounts owed to the insured under that prior
insurance. Although the insured argued that “loss” referred only to each
individual siding claim paid by Stimson and therefore should not reduce
its claims in the aggregate, the federal district court in Oregon held that
this analysis was “unreasonable” and rather held that “loss” should be
understood as being similar to “ultimate net loss” and therefore applied
to the gross amount that the insured is seeking in its claim under the
policy. Accordingly, the court ruled that, “To the extent that there is any
excess insurance coverage available for the siding loss, the non-
cumulation provision applies to reduce National Union’s policy limits
by the amounts paid in prior policy years as amounts paid by other
excess settling insurers.”
Note that more recent editions of the CGL form have added language
expressly addressing how many limits of coverage apply in the case of
so-called “stub” policies that are issued or extended for more than a
single twelve month period. Thus, the standard ISO form (CG 00 01)
provides:The Limits of Insurance of this Coverage Part apply separately to
each consecutive annual period and to any remaining period of
less than 12 m onths, starting with the beginning of the policy
period shown in the Declarations, unless the policy period is
extended after issuance for an additional period of  less than 12
months. In that case, the additional period w ill be deemed part of
the last preceding period for purposes of determining the Limits
of Insurance.
Combined Single Limits
General liability policies now are written on a combined single
limits basis. Instead of the policy providing separate limits for bodily
injury and property damage claims, a single limit governs both.
For the most part, such wording should not affect the number of
occurrences or the circumstances under which aggregate limits apply.
Rather, the main effect of such clauses is simply to make the same limit
applicable to claims for bodily injury or property damage that arise out
of one occurrence. While payments made under bodily injury claims
therefore will reduce the indemnity available for property damage and
vice versa, the same rules apply as are ordinarily applicable with
respect to whether the claims are to be treated as a single occurrence or
otherwise.
The exception to this general statement is language often found in
combined single limit per project aggregate limit endorsements that
state that the applicable limits of liability “shall apply separately to
each project with respect to operations being performed away from
premises owned by or rented to the insured.” Policyholders sometimes
have argued in environmental cases that this language requires a
separate occurrence limit for each shipment of waste that a transporter
disposes of off-site. Despite the fact that there is no further clarification
on what project or operations the clause concerns, it does not appear
that such a sweeping interpretation was intended. Similar endorsementsare available to provide separate general aggregate limits to each of the
insured’s locations.
Cases in Which Disputes Arise
Disputes concerning how an occurrence should be defined typically
involve situations with multiple plaintiffs, multiple insureds, or
widespread injuries.
Multiple Plaintiffs
Most disputes involving the number of occurrences involve multiple
injured parties. Occasionally, claims will arise involving a single
injured party, such as when a patient sues a physician for negligent
failure to properly diagnose or treat his condition over the course of
several consultations. In such circumstances, the issue is whether the
occurrence (typically under a professional liability policy) is the
overall course of treatment or the insured’s discrete acts of negligence.
For instance, a federal district court ruled in All Tech Claims
Manage ment, LLC v. Philadelphia Indemnity Ins. Co., No. 4:10-CV-
01657 (S.D. Tex. July 18, 2011) that an insurance adjusting company
must pay a separate deductible on each claim arising from its adjustment
of Hurricane Ike claims in Texas, rejecting All Tech’s argument that it
was only responsible for a single deductible for all of its adjusting
work arising out of Ike. The court refused to find that the different
adjustment claims were all “logically or causally related.”
Such claims may be complicated by the introduction of additional
claimants through actions for loss of consortium by family members.
Because such claims are derivative in nature and do not allege any
independent claim for bodily injury or property damage, most courts
treat them as being subject to the same policy limit that would apply to
the injured spouse or parent.Multiple Insureds
Most occurrence disputes involve only a single insured. However,
more than one insured may be named in the same suit. This frequently
arises in medical malpractice cases in which the insured’s partner
consults in a diagnosis or actively participates in the patient’s treatment.
If the policy requires that each insured be treated separately when
applying policy limits, the issue again is whether the occurrence was the
overall course of treatment or each insured’s discrete acts of
negligence. Courts are far less likely to find separate causes when one
insured’s negligence was closely interwoven with the others, such as
when one physician negligently relied on his partner’s original
misdiagnosis in prescribing further treatment.
Widespread Injuries
In cases where multiple plaintiffs have filed suit, such as in
widespread asbestos-injury cases, the crucial factor in determining
whether their claims may be aggregated is the extent to which their
injuries occurred closely together in time and space. Courts are far
more likely to find one cause for diverse claimants when the injuries are
part of a continuum of physical conduct by the insured or are otherwise
closely linked together. By contrast, multiple causes are more likely to
be found when the exposures are geographically dispersed or when they
occurred months apart.
Parties to Occurrence Disputes
Although many occurrence disputes fit the classic pattern of a
dispute between insureds and insurers, such disputes also may arise
between insurers and between insurers and reinsurers.
Insured versus InsurerThere are several benefits to keeping primary insurance limits from
being exhausted, not the least of which is the fact that defense costs
often are paid in addition to the limits—as long as coverage limits
remain. In order to maintain these benefits, policyholders typically
argue that claims against them involve multiple occurrences and that
policy aggregates do not apply to each claim. Insureds also may be
forced to take such positions in situations where the available indemnity
limits are simply inadequate to pay for the claims against them.
The coverage calculus becomes more complicated, however, when
the primary policies contain deductibles or self-insured retentions that
are written on a per occurrence basis and are not subject to any ceiling
or aggregate. In such cases, a finding of multiple occurrences requires
the insured to pay much more of the loss and significantly diminishes the
value of its insurance coverage.
For example, a policy with a $25,000 per occurrence self-insured
retention (SIR) and a $1 million liability limit may be triggered by
claims from multiple victims. If each claim were considered an
occurrence, the insured could have access to multiple $1 million
settlement limits. However, the insured also could be responsible for
the same number of $25,000 S IRs.
Insurer versus Insurer
Disputes also may arise between different layers of insurance,
particularly between primary and umbrella insurers. A primary insurer
may argue that its duty to provide a defense to mass tort claims against a
policyholder ends when it settles some of the claims and exhausts the
policy’s occurrence limit. An excess insurer may argue that the claims
involve more than one occurrence and that the primary insurer should
continue to defend and be responsible for indemnity obligations.
Insurer versus ReinsurerFinally, disputes may arise between insurers and reinsurers with
respect to whether related types of claims should be grouped together to
penetrate the reinsurance certificate or treaty. Although such disputes
generally are based on event or happe ning language that is different
from conventional occurrence wordings, the disputes often are impacted
by decisions that primary insurers make when addressing their
policyholders’ claims. They also are affected by the manner in which
the ceding insurer assigns value to particular claims in the context of a
global settlement or policy buyback. Finally, in the absence of
reinsurance case law, courts considering such issues may fall back on
CGL precedents.
Legal Tests for Counting Occurrences
Courts have devised three rules for determining whether multiple
instances of bodily injury or property damage should be treated as
arising out of more than one occurrence:
1)    The Cause Test. The first, and by far the most broadly accepted
rule, is the so-called cause approach in which all losses arising out of
the same source are treated as one occurrence.
2)    The Event Test. A related approach that is followed for the most
part only in New York is the unfortunate event analysis, in which
temporal and spatial limitations are applied when determining whether
losses have a common cause. In short, injuries that are closely grouped
in time and space are more likely to be treated as a single occurrence
than those that are more spread out.
3)    The Effect Test. Finally, an earlier but now largely discredited
approach considered the effect of causes in determining whether they
presented multiple occurrences.
While most courts have adopted the cause approach, cause has
meant different things to different courts. Indeed, its very elasticity has
permitted courts to adopt different meanings of cause to maximize
coverage for policyholders in different types of cases while still
purporting to be true to the cause test.Cause Meanings
To the extent that applicable case law can be dissected, cause
analysis has been accorded one of two different meanings: proximate
cause and legal cause.
Immediate Physical Cause of Injuries (Proximate Cause)
The most common meaning of cause is a physical one, that is, the
event that is the immediate cause of the plaintiff’s injuries. For instance,
the Fifth Circuit ruled in H.E. Butt Grocery Co. v. National Union Fire
Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, 150 F.3d 526 (5th Cir. 1998)  that two separate
sexual assaults by a store employee were separate occurrences for the
purpose of applying a self-insured retention. Even though the claims
were based on the insured’s negligent failure to supervise the employee,
the court declared that the immediate cause of the underlying injuries
was the intervening intentional tort of the employee. Therefore, each
separate assault was a separate occurrence. A concurring opinion took
issue with the court’s immediate cause analysis, arguing instead that the
number of occurrences should be based on the event giving rise to
liability from the insured’s point of view. The outcome of the case
would have been the same, however.
In cases where the insured’s conduct was the immediate cause of the
injuries, courts typically define cause in a manner similar to the tort
conception of proximate cause. These cases tend to consider the direct,
physical cause of the injuries as the yardstick for measuring whether the
claims shared a common origin. For example, when the insured
physically strikes a plaintiff—whether with fists, a weapon, or a motor
vehicle—courts have tended to find that each separate physical act is a
new occurrence.
A distinction sometimes is drawn between cases in which the
insured literally is out of control, as in the case of a speeding car that
ricochets from one collision to the next, and instances in which the
insured has the oppor tunity to stop and gain control of the situationbetween each act to prevent further injuries. Courts are far more likely
to find only one occurrence in the former fact pattern than in the latter.
Event Giving Rise to Insured’s Liability (Legal Cause)
The Connecticut Supreme Court has suggested that cause cases may
be divided into two separate categories: those that consider the physical
cause of the plaintiff’s injuries and those that trigger the insured’s
liability. As seen in Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Aetna Casualty &
Surety Company , 765 A. 2d 891 (Conn. 2001) , the court refused to find
that Metropolitan’s failure to disclose asbestos risks was the cause of
the underlying claimants’ asbestos injuries. Instead the court found that
each claimant’s exposure to asbestos was a separate occurrence, which
decreased Metropolitan’s ability to trigger excess liability coverage.
In Mitsui Sumitomo Ins. Co. of America v. Automatic Elevator Co.,
09-00480 ( M.D.N.C. September 13, 201 1), aff’d, No. 11-2057 (4th Cir.
Feb. 11, 2013) , a court ruled that allegations that the insured negligently
disposed of waste hydraulic fluid that Duke University mistakenly
subsequently used to clean hundreds of surgical instruments involved a
single occurrence. The court declared that the occurrence in this case
was the elevator contractor’s negligence in failing to properly dispose
of waste created in the course of its maintenance work, rejecting Duke’s
argument that there is no occurrence until injury occurs and that, as a
result, the focus of the limits analysis must be on the individual
surgeries that were performed on different individuals at different times
in different hospitals over a sixty-day period. These findings were
affirmed by the Fourth Circuit in an unpublished 2013 opinion.
Notwithstanding the insured’s argument that the court should have
looked to the “most immediate cause” to find multiple occurrences, the
Court of Appeals ruled that “looking to the number of surgeries or
instances of using hydraulic fluid to wash surgical instruments to
determine the number of occurrences would turn the focus from
Automatic Elevator’s alleged negligence to Duke’s actions”. Because
Automatic Elevator is the insured party, calculating the number of
occurrences based on Duke’s conduct would contradict other courts’conclusions that it is more appropriate to “focus on the act of the
insureds that gave rise to their liability.”
Most general liability policies provide that bodily injury and
property damage arising out of “continuous or repeated exposure to
substantially the same general harmful conditions” is considered as
arising out of one occurrence. (This or similar wording may be included
in the definition of occurrence or within a limits of liability section in
various editions of standard CGL forms.) Some have argued that this
conditions language should be interpreted in reference to the acts or
omissions that form the basis for the insured’s legal liability. When the
insured acts in direct physical proximity to the plaintiff, as in many
preceding examples, these conditions coincide. However, when the
insured’s conduct is remote from the immediate cause of the plaintiff’s
injuries—as in products liability cases or theories of liability based on
negligent training, supervision, or inspection—the direct cause of injury
may have little relevance to the legal cause for purposes of ascertaining
the number of occurrences.
For instance, a defective product placed in the stream of commerce
by a manufacturer typically will pass through numerous middlemen and
intervening circumstances before it physically encounters and injures
the plaintiff. In such circumstances, courts will look to the last event
over which the insured had any control or which otherwise forms the
legal basis for the suit against it. As a result, a given set of claims may
comprise only one occurrence for the manufacturer but could result in
multiple occurrences for the vendor who sold the product to multiple
individuals.
A minority view holds that individual legal theories may not form a
basis for separate occurrences, however. For example, in S.F. v. West
American Ins. Co., 463 S.E.2d 450 (Va. 1995) , the court declared that
the meaning of occurrence was ambiguous in that it could extend to the
insured’s hiring, supervision, or negligent retention of the molester.
However, in Danielson v. ABC Ins. Co., 623 N.W.2d 182 (Wis. App.
2000) , the court decided that the plaintiff was only entitled to a single
“occurrence limit” despite a separate theory of liability involving theinsured’s negligent entrustment of his vehicle. What may be relevant is
the act forming the basis for the insured’s liability, not the theories of
liability themselves.
For the most part, courts have refused to find that the “conditions”
language supports the aggregation of multiple claims on the basis of a
pattern of conduct. As discussed previously, the court in H.E. Butt
Grocery Company v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, 150
F.3d 526 (5th Cir. 1988) , refused to combine two sexual assaults on two
different children into one occurrence despite the fact that both claims
were predicated on the insured employer’s negligence in failing to
prevent the assaults by its pedophilic employee. Similarly, in American
Red Cross v. Travelers Ind. Co. of Rhode  Island, 816 F. Supp. 755 (D.
D.C. 1993), the court refused to treat the insured’s “general, negligent
practice in handling HIV-contaminated blood”  as the “cause.”
Burden of Proof Issues
An issue that is rarely considered but of considerable significance
in many of these cases is whether it is the insurer or policyholder who
has the burden of establishing the cause of the underlying loss.
In a case of first impression, the Illinois Supreme Court assigned
this burden to a liability insurer. In Addison Ins. Co. v. Faye, 2009 Ill.
LEXIS 176 (Ill. January 23, 2009), the court ruled that although an
insured has the burden of proving that a loss is covered in the first
instance, the issue of limits was more of a limitation on coverage for
which the insurer had the burden of proof. In keeping with Nicor, the
court declared that the losses would be viewed as separate occurrences
if they were the result of separate and intervening human acts or each
act increased the insured’s exposure to liability. The case involved the
death of two boys who died of hypothermia after getting trapped
outdoors in wet sand on a neighbor’s property but were not discovered
until days later. While stating that the two deaths might well have
involved a single occurrence if the injuries had occurred closely
together in time and space, the court found that it was impossible toprove how the boys died. As the insurer had failed in its burden of
proof, the court held that the claims must be treated as involving
separate occurrences.
External Factors Impacting Occurrence
Determinations
Role of Insured
The resolution of these disputes often depends on where the insured
stands in relation to how the accident occurred. The distinction may be
illustrated by several cases that involved bodily injuries caused by a
shooting.
In American Ind. Co. v. McQuaig, 435 So. 2d 414 (Fla. App.
1983) , a homeowner engaged in a shoot-out with the police, injuring
three officers with successive shotgun blasts. The District Court of
Appeals held that each shotgun blast was a separate occurrence.
Likewise, an incident in which the plaintiff separately shot and killed
various family members was held to involve multiple occurrences
based upon a claimed ambiguity in the meaning of occurrence in State
Farm Lloyds, Inc. v. Williams, 960 S.W. 2nd 781 (Tex. Civ. App.
1997) . By contrast, in Travelers Ind. Co. v. Olive’s Spor ting Goods ,
764 S.W.2d 596 (Ark. 1989) , a sporting goods  store was sued by
several individuals who were injured after a person to whom the store
had sold a gun went on a shooting spree. In these circumstances, the
Arkansas Supreme Court held that all of the claims against the insured
arose out of the same occurrence, which was the insured’s sale of the
gun.
The courts’ seemingly inconsistent analyses in these gunshot cases
may be harmonized by taking into account the role of the insured
relative to the immediate, direct cause of the plaintiffs’ injuries. In the
Texas and Florida cases, the insured stood in direct proximity to theplaintiffs’ injuries and was able to control the manner of injury as he
aimed and fired. By contrast, in the Arkansas case, the insured’s role
ended at the point of sale, and that insured had no influence over the
manner in which the gun caused injury. Thus, the determination of the
number of occurrences is significantly affected by whether the insured
had any oppor tunity to control the process of injury after it commenced.
Similarly, when numerous persons are injured as the result of an
ongoing physical process, the resulting injuries typically will be treated
as one occurrence. In cases involving natural disasters, such as fires,
floods , or auto accidents where the vehicle caroms off one car before
striking others, courts generally have found only one occurrence. This is
illustrated in American Cas. Co. v. Heary, 432 F. Supp. 995 (E.D. Va.
1977) , where the court ruled that traffic accidents resulting from the
collapse of utility lines a minute after the insured ran into a telephone
pole all arose out of one occurrence; in Bish v. Guaranty Nat. Ins. Co.,
848 P.2d 1057 (Nev. 1993) , in which the insured ran over the plaintiff,
put the car in reverse and then ran her over again, the court ruled that the
claims involved a single occurrence despite the multiple culpable acts
of conduct; and in Miley v. Continental Ins. Co., 645 So. 2d 1166 (La.
App. 1994) , in which two car collisions that occurred fifteen minutes
apart were held to arise out of a single occurrence because both were
caused by smoke from a controlled burn that the insured was conducting
in a forest adjacent to the highway.
Likewise, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit ruled in
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Munroe, 614 F.3d 322 (7th Cir. 2010)  that
successive collisions involving three trucks that the insured was
operating in a convoy only triggered a single $1 million occurrence
limit for allegations with respect to the insured’s alleged negligence in
hiring and training the truck drivers. Applying Illinois law, the court
rejected the plaintiff’s argument that there were three limits at issue
based upon separate negligent acts of each defendant, declaring instead
that the case involved a single uninterrupted chain reaction.
In such cases, the insured was the immediate physical cause of the
injuries. Absent some intervening cause, courts typically treat all of theresulting claims as one occurrence. Further, when the acts of negligence
are interconnected, they will not be examined separately to create new
occurrences.
On the other hand, courts sometimes find more than one occurrence
in cases where the insured has the oppor tunity to stop further injury but
failed to do so. In such cases, courts are far more likely to treat each
new injury as a separate occurrence. However, in at least one case, the
Wisconsin Court of Appeals ruled that, even though a motorist drove
over a cyclist and then accidentally backed over him again, these
separate incidents were part of the same occurrence because they were
the single, uninterrupted cause of the cyclist’s injuries. See Welter v.
Singer, 376 N .W.2d 84 ( Wis. App. 1985) .
Physical Proximity/Continuity of Damage
Where numerous persons are injured as the result of an on-going
physical process, the resulting injuries will typically be treated as one
occurrence. Thus, in cases involving natural disasters, such as fires or
floods , or auto accidents where the vehicle caroms off one car before
striking others, courts have generally found only one occurrence. See
USAA v. Bagge tt, 209 Cal. App.3d 1387, 258 Cal. Rptr. 52 (1989)
(collision that occurred when a third car ran into motorists who had
gotten out of their vehicles to talk after they ran into each other held to
arise out of the same accident). In such cases, the insured is the
immediate physical cause of the resulting injuries. Absent some
intervening cause, courts typically treat all of the resulting claims as one
occurrence. Further, where the acts of negligence are interconnected,
they will not be examined separately to create new occurrences.
On the other hand, courts may sometimes find more than one
occurrence in cases where the insured has the oppor tunity to stop further
injury but fails to do so. In such cases, courts are far more likely to treat
each new injury as a separate occurrence. But see, Welter v. Singer,
376 N.W.2d 84 (Wis. App. 1985)  (even though car drove over a cyclist
and then accidentally backed over him again, these separate incidentswere part of the same occurrence because they were the single,
uninterrupted cause of the cyclist’s injuries).
Insured’s Coverage Profile
Apart from the insured’s role relative to the underlying claims, the
single most important factor governing the resolution of these disputes is
the insured’s coverage profile and, in particular, whether the policies in
question contain low indemnity limits, deductibles, or self-insured
retentions.
In seeking to maximize coverage, courts first will look at the type of
claims presented. Does the insured face hundreds of small claims that
largely will be absorbed by policy deductibles and retentions? If so,
courts are far more likely to treat the claims as involving one
occurrence. Alternatively, are the individual suits themselves quite
serious, in that they may exceed the insured’s individual policy limits?
In such circumstances, courts often will maximize the available
coverage by treating the claims as separate occurrences.
Small Claims/Large Retentions
A close examination of the cases in which courts have ruled that
mass tort liabilities were all one occurrence reveals that a large number
of them feature policies containing large self-insured retentions or
similar features that would otherwise have adversely impacted
coverage availability for the insured. Examples of such an approach
when insured retentions affect coverage applicability are Champion
International Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 546 F.2d 502 (2d Cir.
1976) ; Champion International Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 701
F. Supp. 409 (S.D.N.Y. 1988) , and Owens Illinois, Inc. v. United
Insurance Co., 625 A.2d 1 (N.J. App. 1993)  rev’d on other grounds ,
650 A .2d 974 ( N.J. 1994) .Likewise, in Transport Ins. Co. v. Lee Way Motor Freight, Inc. 487
F. Supp. 1325 (N.D. Tex. 1980) , multiple instances of race
discrimination at four separate locations were found to arise out of a
single “pattern and practice” and thus constituted one occurrence under
a policy that had a $25,000 pe r occurrence deductible.
In Washoe County v. Transcontinental Ins. Co., 878 P.2d 306 (Nev.
1994) , the Nevada Supreme Court declared that dozens of sexual
molestation suits against the county for its claimed failure to properly
inspect and monitor the operations of a private day-care center
constituted a single occurrence. By state law, the county’s liability for
such claims was $50,000, the same amount as its self-insured retention
in its insurance policy. A finding of multiple occurrences would have
effectively nullified the value of the coverage. Even though this
consideration was not stated in the court’s opinion, it surely influenced
it.
There are exceptions to every general rule, however. Courts have
decided in several hearing loss cases that the individual liabilities may
not be aggregated to maximize coverage, even though the rulings have
largely vitiated the value of these policies to the insureds. This is
illustrated in Norfolk and Western Railway Co. v. Accident and Cas.
Ins. Co. of Winterthur, 796 F. Supp. 929 (W.D. Va. 1992) , aff’d on
other grounds , 41 F .3d 928 ( 4th Cir.1994) .
Likewise, the Second Circuit has issued a series of rulings in
asbestos and environmental cases declaring that an insurer’s policy
obligations are not triggered until the pro rata share allocable to that
policy year exhausts a full self-insured retention for each policy. See
Stonewall Ins. Co. v. Asbestos Claims Manage ment Corp., 73 F.3d
1178 (2nd Cir. 1995) and Maryland Casualty Co. v. GerlingKonzern
Allgemiene Versicherungs -Atiengelsellschaft, 128 F.3d 794 (2nd Cir.
1997) , and Olin Corp. v. INA, 221 F .3d 307 ( 2nd Cir. 2000) .
Deductibles and Self-Insured Retentions (SIRs)Policyholders have vigorously argued that successive policy limits
may be triggered for continuing injury claims when the argument is in
their best interest to obtain additional coverage. However, they have
oppos ed this analysis when the question of multiple policy deductibles
is at stake. In such instances policyholders have contended that, when
there is a single occurrence, the most they should pay in the aggregate is
a single occurrence deductible, or, alternatively, that their obligations
should be prorated over multiple policies because the claims arise out
of a single occurrence.
A number of courts that have adopted a single occurrence approach
have been influenced by the involvement of per occurrence deductibles
or self-insured retentions. These include U.S. Gypsum Company  v.
Admiral Ins. Co., 643 N.E.2d 1226 (Ill. App. 1994)  and Owens
Illinois, Inc. v. United Insurance Co., 625 A.2d 1 (N.J. App. 1993)
rev’d on ot her grounds , 650 A .2d 974 ( N.J. 1994) .
These deductible/retention cases fall into two categories: 1) those in
which the insured must pay a full deductible for every policy year for
which coverage is triggered, and 2) those in which the most an insured
may be required to pay is a single deductible, no matter how many
policy years are triggered by the occurrence.
One Full Deductible for Each Year. The majority view is that an
insured is responsible for a separate retention in each policy year for
which it claims coverage.
In Northern States Power Co. v. Fidelity & Cas. Co., 523 N.W.2d
657 (Minn. 1994) , the Minnesota Supreme Court ruled that clean up
claims involving the insured’s MGP sites were a single occurrence that
should be pro-rated across the entire period of pollution on a “time on
the risk” basis. The Court further ruled that even though the claim was
one occurrence the insured must pay a full self-insured retention in each
triggered pol icy year.
In Owens-Illinois, Inc. v. United Ins. Co., 264 N.J. Super. 460, 625
A.2d 1 (1993) , reversed on other grounds , 138 N.J. 437, 650 A.2d 974
(1994) , the Appellate Division ruled that an asbestos manufacturer wasobligated to pay a separate $250,000 self-insured retention for each
policy under which the insured was claiming coverage for asbestos
liabilities. The court rejected the insurers’ contention that the insured
was responsible for a separate SIR for each underlying suit, however.
Later, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled in Benjamin Moore &
Co. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 179 N.J. 87, 843 A.2d 1094
(2004)  that a policyholder is responsible for a full occurrence
deductible in each triggered year. Notwithstanding its recent ruling in
Spalding that had refused to give effect to a non-cumulation clause that
would have limited an insurer’s allocated share beyond that otherwise
called for in Owens-Illinois and Carter-Wallace, the Supreme Court
ruled that the purpose of Owens-Illinois was simply to standardize
irregular environmental losses into separate occurrences that could be
assigned to individual policy years. After that, so long as the policy
terms were not inconsistent with Owens-Illinois, they should be given
effect. Two dissenting judges argued that this result rendered the
coverage illusory and that Benjamin Moore should have been entitled to
pro-rate its deductibles consistent with the overall period of  injury.
In Missouri Pacific Railroad Co. v. International Ins. Co., 288 Ill.
App.3d 69, 679 N.E.2d 801 (1997) , an Illinois trial court had originally
permitted the insured railroad to pick and choose the policies under
which it wanted coverage for noise induced hearing loss (NIHL)
claims. On appeal, however, the Second District of the Appellate Court
of Illinois found that coverage for NIHL claims must be allocated over
the total period in which the injury was alleged to have occurred.
Furthermore, the court reaffirmed the principle of “horizontal
exhaustion” under Illinois law, declaring that the insured was
responsible for exhausting all self-insured retentions before it could
obtain coverage from its excess carriers. The court rejected the
insured’s argument that self-insurance is not “insurance” to which the
excess policies’ “other insurance” clauses would apply.
In Olin Corporation v. INA, 972 F. Supp. 189, 202 (S.D.N.Y. 1997) ,
aff’d, 221 F.3d 307 (2nd Cir. 2000) , the U.S. District Court declared
that most policy periods were potentially triggered by the underlyingDDT pollution claims against Olin. Further, under New York law, the
court declared that the loss must be apportioned over the years of
available insurance coverage. Each of the years in question contained a
$300,000 “per occurrence” limit for which Olin was responsible for a
$100,000 “per occurrence” deductible. Although Olin contended that it
was entitled to multiple $300,000 limits, it argued that the most it
should pay pursuant to these deductible provisions was $100,000 in the
aggregate. The district court disagreed, declaring that Olin was required
to pay a full deductible of $100,000 for each policy year for which
indemnity was otherwise required. On appeal, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the district court’s ruling that
Olin was responsible for a full self-insured retention in each year for
which coverage was otherwise triggered, rejecting the insured’s
argument that the most that it owed for all policies was a single SIR.
Likewise, the Second Circuit ruled in In Re Prudential Lines, Inc.,
158 F.3d 65 (2nd Cir. 1998)  that a “per occurrence” deductible should
be applied separately to each asbestos bodily injury claim presented
against a bankrupt shipping company. The court’s analysis reflected bot h
its view of New York law and the evidence concerning how the parties
had anticipated this issue.
In Ingersoll-Rand Co. v. Ins. Co. of N. Am, Bergen No. L-37910- 89
(N.J. Super. November 16, 1995) , the insured sought coverage for
asbestos liabilities under policies issued by INA between 1954 and
1961. INA took the position that there was only one occurrence and that
its policy obligations were therefore restricted to a single policy limit
of $1 million. The court ruled to the contrary, however, finding that each
policy limit was potentially triggered up to a maximum potential
recovery of $8 million. However, the court disagreed with the insured
that it would only need to pay one self-insured retention, holding that it
must pay a separate SIR for each policy year in which indemnity was
owed.
In Range r Ins. Co. v. Safety-Kleen Corp., 814 F.Supp. 744 (N.D.
Ill. 1993), Safety-Kleen sought coverage for a leukemia claim allegedly
suffered by a worker as the result of breathing benzene from theinsured’s de-greasing product from 1978 or 1980 until May 1987.
Following a settlement of the claim, Ranger sought reimbursement from
Safety-Kleen for $200,000, reflecting the $50,000 deductible in each of
four policies. Safety-Kleen argued, however, that the claim involved
only a single occurrence and thus only one $50,000 deductible. The
court agreed that the claim involved only one occurrence but also ruled
that Ranger was entitled to repayment of a deductible for each
additional policy year under which coverage might be sought.
The Delaware Supreme Court ruled in Stonewall Ins. Co. v. E.I. Du
Pont De Nemours & Co., 996 A.2d 1254  (Del. 2010)  that Du Pont was
only required to contribute a single $50 million SIR for claims
involving alleged defects in polybutylene plumbing systems. The court
rejected Stonewall’s contention that the underlying claims had two
separate and independent causes (chemical degradation and the
product’s inability to resist mechanical stresses). “Whether the failure
resulted from the product’s susceptibility to chemical degradation from
the inside of the pipe or from its inability to withstand mechanical stress
from the outside, or both, the product itself was the source of the leaking
polybutylene systems and the resulting property damage,” said the court.
One Deductible for Entire Period of Injury. A minority view
holds that the insured is only responsible for a single occurrence
deductible or SIR no matter how many policies are triggered.
In Boston Gas Company  v. Century Ind. Co., 454 Mass. 337, 910
N.E.2d 290 (2009) , the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts held
in an environmental liability case that where all of the underlying
primary policies contained self-insured retentions, the insured was only
required to pay a proportional share of the SIR for each triggered
policy.
In Skinner Corp. v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., No. C95-995 WD,
1996 WL 376657 (W.D. Wash. April 2, 1996) , the district court ruled
that Skinner need only pay a single policy deductible. The ruling was
based upon the court’s finding that there had only been a single
catastrophe or accident for all claims arising out of the presence of
asbestos on board any individual vessel.In Hercules, Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., Nos. 92C-10-105 and
90C-FE-195-1-CV, 1998 Del. Super. LEXIS 459 (September 30, 1998) ,
the insured sought repayment of $45 million it had spent to clean up an
Arkansas manufacturing plant that had manufactured Agent Orange. The
court ruled that the insured’s loss should be prorated on a “time on the
risk” basis. The court also decided that Hercules was only obligated to
assume a single self-insured retention for the entire period, rejecting
American Home’s contention that a $2 million SIR should apply for
each of the twenty-four years that property damage took place.
Accordingly, the court ruled that the $2 million SIR should only apply
once and be spread ove r the entire period of  injury time.
Having ruled that the NIHL claims against the insured railroad all
arose out of one occurrence, the court further declared in Atchison
Topeka & Santa Fe Railway Company  v. Stonewall Ins. Co., Shawnee
County Case No. 94-CV-1464 (Kan. Dist. Ct. July 24, 2000) , rev’d 71
P.3d 1097 (Kan 2003) , Santa Fe was only required to pay a single SIR
or deductible no matter how many policy years were triggered. The
court ruled that Santa Fe was not required to exhaust all of its self-
insured retentions before accessing its excess coverage, nor was it
required to pay more than a single deductible for a single occurrence
that occurred over multiple periods of time before the excess policies
were triggered. While conceding that Kansas law requires that all
primary coverage be exhausted before excess coverage is triggered, the
court declared that this general rule does not apply inasmuch as the self-
insured retentions are not primary insurance. Unlike Missouri-Pacific,
in which the Appellate Court of Illinois had ruled that SIRs are
insurance, the court declared that the Santa Fe retentions were not
treated in the policies as insurance nor did the policyholder agree
contractually to be a primary insurer. This finding was sustained on
appeal by the Kansas Supreme Court, which agreed that the cause of the
insured’s liability was the failure to provide a safe working
environment.
Prorated Deductible over Triggered Period. Finally, when
insureds have only been permitted to obtain a single occurrence limit
regardless of how many policy years were triggered, courts have tendedto rule that indemnity obligations owed by the insured because of
deductibles or self-insured retentions should be correspondingly
prorated. For example, in Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Lafarge
Corp., 1997 U.S. App. LEXIS 22807 * 17 (4th Cir. August 28, 1997)
(unpublished), the court affirmed the lower court’s ruling that the insurer
was entitled to one-twelfth of its deductible when toxic tort claims
triggered twelve years of coverage. Likewise, in Lafarge Corp. v.
Hartford Ins. Co., 61 F.3d 389 (5th Cir. 1995) , the insurer’s deductible
was prorated in the same manner as loss was apportioned among
respective years of coverage. In Clemtex, Inc. v. Southeastern Fidelity
Ins. Co., 807 F.2d 1271  (5th Cir. 1987) , the Fifth Circuit ruled that an
insurer could not demand the protection of a separate per claim
deductible when the losses otherwise would be prorated over the total
period of injury. Consistent with the overall loss-spreading approach,
the court declared that the insurer could only insist on the same
fractional share of its deductible as it was otherwise paying in
indemnity, stating:
Thus, for instance, if an insurer must indemnify Clemtex for only
one tenth of Clemtex’s liability under a silicosis claim, the insurer
would be entitled to only one tenth of a $10,000 per claim
deductible, in other words $1,000.
The resolution of such disputes is more complicated in states that
otherwise have allowed an insured to pick and choose among triggered
policies, whether on a theory of all-sums or joint and several liability.
In cases where certain policies contain retentions but others do n ot, such
courts have tended to permit insureds to allocate claims to the policies
that lack deductibles or SIRs. In TPLC, Inc. v. United National Ins.
Co., 44 F.3d 1484 (10th Cir. 1995)  (Pennsylvania law), the circuit court
reversed a district court ruling that an insured should pay a share of the
cost of defending heart valve claims for that portion of injury that
occurred during a self-insured period.
Low Indemnity LimitsCourts often are most likely to find multiple occurrences when the
limits of liability are relatively low compared to the insured’s total
exposure.
In Slater v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 400 N.E.2d 1256 (Mass.
1980) , the fidelity portion of USF&G’s policy limited coverage to
$10,000 per occurrence. The Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
ruled that a scheme in which an employee had embezzled funds on
several occasions over a period of months involved multiple
occurrences because the employee could have stoppe d his course of
illegal conduct at any time.
Similar reasoning likely was behind many courts’ treatment of mass
tort liabilities when ruling one occurrence per claimant. For example,
see Asbestos Insurance Coverage Cases, Judicial Counc il
Coordination Proceeding No. 1072 , Tentative Decision on Phase IV
Issues, 52 Cal. Rptr.2d 690 (Cal. App. 1996)  and Houston v. Avondal e
Shipyards, 506 S o. 2d 149 ( La. App. 1987) , which is a silicosis case.
Insurer Insolvency
A somewhat analogous issue involves the obligation of state
guaranty funds to indemnify policyholders for mass tort claims for
which coverage otherwise would have been owed by insolvent insurers.
In general, courts have ruled that the number of “covered claims” should
be determined through the number of individual underlying tort
claimants, rather than the underlying accident giving rise to the claims.
This analysis can be seen in H.K. Porter v. Pennsylvania Ins. Guaranty
Assoc., 75 F.3d 137 (3rd Cir. 1996)  and Dickerson v. Thompson, 624
N.E.2d 784 (Ohio App. 1993) , both asbestos cases, and Conne cticut
Ins. Guaranty Assoc. v. Union Carbide Corp., 585 A.2d 1216 (Conn.
1991) , which involved Bhopal toxic tort claimants.
Case Law SurveyTrends by type of claim also can be useful when considering
whether single or multiple occurrences affect the application of
coverage. The theories discussed are illustrated in the following
discussion of claims by type.
Premises Liability Claims
There are a number of occurrences disputes that arise in the context
of insured homes or businesses. Many of these involve property damage
to unit owners or occupants due to fire or flood. Others involve bodily
injuries. For instance, the Arizona Court of Appeals ruled in Austin
Mut. Ins. Co. v. Aldecoa, 2011 WL 4794736 (Ariz. App. Oct. 11, 2011)
that the death of two children who drowned while under their
grandparents’ care involved separate occurrences. Applying a cause
analysis, Division II held that there were separate causative acts of
negligence on the part of the grandparents as one left the outside door
unlatched after she fell ill whereas the grandfather left the children in
another room and went upstairs to watch television where he fell
asleep. Since each act could have independently led to the children
wandering outside and drowning in their parents’ swimming pool, the
court held that there were two different causes of the event and therefore
separate occurrences.
Applying a cause test, the court ruled in Western World Ins. Co. v.
Wilkie, 5:06-cv-64 (E.D.N.C. November 1, 2007)  that injuries suffered
by various children who suffered injury as the result of coming into
contact with fecal matter while petting animals at the insured’s petting
zoo in the course of a week’s visit at the state fair all of the claims arose
out of exposure to the same general harmful conditions (the presence of
e. coli at the zoo).
Other cases include:
•    Allied Grand D oll Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Globe Indem. Co., 225
N.Y.S.2d 595 ( N.Y. App. D iv. 1962) . Water that damaged manybusinesses was caused by an open faucet in the insured’s
business, which was held to be a single accident.
•    Continental Ins. Companies v. Hancock, 507 S .W.2d 146 ( Ky.
App. 1973) . Claims that were filed against a bar by individuals
who were injured in a brawl that began inside the bar and then
continued outside all involved the same occurrence.
•    Doria v. Ins. Co. of N. Am., 509 A .2d 220 ( N.J. App. D iv.
1986) . Injuries to two boy s that happened when one fell in a
swimming pool  while trying to rescue the other arose out of one
occurrence. The injuries resulted from the same cause and were
closely linked in time and space.
•    Evanston Ins. Co. v. Ghillie Suits Com., Inc., 2009 U .S. Dist.
LEXIS 22256 ( N.D. Cal. 2009) . Injuries suffered by two U.S.
Marines who were burned during a training exercise when the
insured’s fireproof clothing caught fire triggered two separate
occurrences on the theory that the second marine was injured
when he went to the aid of the first marine, whose clothing had
caught fire as the result of a muzzle flash such that the injuries
had two different causes.
•    Kosnoski v. Rogers, No. 13- 0494 ( W. Va. February 18, 2014) .
Personal injuries suffered by various building occupants as the
result of a discharge of carbon monoxide fumes from a
defective furnace all arose out of the same occurrence.
•    Michaels v. Mutual Marine Office, Inc., 472 F . Supp. 26
(S.D.N.Y. 1979) . The court found one event when damage to a
ship’s deck was caused by the continuous and repeated
dropping of grab buckets during unloading.
•    Reynolds v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 1995 U .S. Dist. LEXIS 589
(E.D. La. January 18, 1995) . Claims from four residents who
suffered carbon monoxide poisoning over a twenty-four-hour
period w ere separate occurrences because each was injured in
a different way.•    Scottsdale Ins. Co. v. Robertson, 338 I ll.App.3d 397, 788
N.E.2d 279 ( 2003) . Carbon monoxide poisoning claims brought
by tenants against a landlord were subject to a single
occurrence limit notwithstanding the insured’s claim that each
injured individual had suffered a separate occurrence triggering
the aggregate limit of the policy.
•    Ware v. First Specialty Ins. Corp., 983 N .E.2d 1 115 (Ill. App.
2013) . Individuals who were injured when the insured’s porch
collapsed during a party were subject to a single occurrence
limit.
Diverse damage claims also may be aggregated when they
individually result from the same physical cause, as in the case of a
building fire or train crash.
•    Barrett v. Iowa National Mut. Ins. Co., 264 F .2d 224 ( 9th Cir.
1959) . A fire that damaged the property of seven tenants was
held to be one accident.
•    Broadhe ad v. Hartford, 773 F . Supp. 882 ( S.D. Miss. 1991) ,
aff’d, 979 F .2d 209 ( 5th Cir. 1992) . Various claims arising from
a gas well blowout were ruled a single occurrence.
•    Denham  v. La Sal le-Madison H otel Co., 168 F .2d 576 ( 7th Cir.
1948) . Claims for fire damage filed by numerous guests in the
insured hotel were subject to a single policy limit.
•    Travelers Indemnity Co v. New England B ox Co., 157 A .2d
765 ( N.H. 1960) . All damages caused by a fire were held to be
a single occurrence.
•    Tri-State Roofing C o. v. New Amsterdam Cas. Co., 139 F .
Supp. 193 ( W.D. Pa. 1955) . Fire that began at the insured’s job
site and subsequently spread to ten other properties was found
to be subject to a single policy limit.Such claims may be contrasted with Goose Creek Consol. I.S.D. v.
Continental Cas. Co., 658 S.W.2d 338 (Tex. App. 1983) , in which the
Texas Court of Appeals ruled that fires set by the same arsonist at two
insured locations several hours apart were separate occurrences.
Food Poisoning Claims
A similar analysis has been applied to outbreaks of food poisoning
at restaurants. In John Mason v. The Home Ins. Co. of Illinois, 532
N.E.2d 526 (Ill. App.1988) , the court declared that incidences of
botulism among restaurant patrons all were caused by an improperly
prepared batch of onions and, therefore, arose out of a single
occurrence. The court rejected arguments that the limits of coverage
should be determined by the number of portions of contaminated food
that were served to customers. Similar reasoning also is seen in
Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 968 F. Supp. 444 (E.D.
Ark. 1997) , in which three separate hepatitis claims involving
contaminated food at a Taco Bell outlet all arose out of the same
occurrence—the insured’s negligent handling and storage of food.
In an Oklahoma case, the Tenth Circuit ruled in Republic
Underwriters, Inc. v. Moore, 2012 U.S. App. LEXIS 14907 (10th Cir.
July 20, 2012)  that the E. Coli poisoning of 341 persons who became
sick after eating the insured’s contaminated food a ll arose out of a single
occurrence, rejecting the finding of an Oklahoma district court that there
were two separate occurrences here because some of the food was
prepared at the insured’s restaurant and other portions at the church
where the insured was catering a social event. Notwithstanding the
“geographical distinction”, the Tenth Circuit ruled that all of the injuries
were proximately caused by the restaurant’s preparation of
contaminated food and that “it did not matter that the food was served
with food items prepared at another location because the contamination
originated at the restaurant.”
Construction Defect and Building ClaimsIn property damage cases against building contractors, some courts
permit aggregation when the claims share a common physical cause as
shown in the following cases:
•    Bethpage  Water District v. S. Z ara & Sons , 145 A .D.2d 637,
546 N .Y.S.2d 645 ( 1989) . Diverse claims arising out of the
insured contractor’s negligent backfilling of a municipal sewer
system all involved exposure to “substantially the same general
conditions”. Only a single occurrence deductible was required.
•    Chemstar, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 797 F . Supp. 1541
(C.D. Cal. 1992) , aff’d, 41 F .3d 429 ( 9th Cir. 1994) . A
contractor’s failure to warn homeowners that its plaster product
was unsuitable for use was the cause of all ensuing claims
involving unsightly blemishes to homes.
•    Owners Ins. Co. v. Salmonsen, 366 S .C. 336, 622 S .E.2d 525
(S.C. 2005) . Construction defect claims arising out of the
insured’s manufacture and sale of defective stucco products all
arise out of a single occurrence as claims were based on the
distribution of an inherently defective product and not because
of any defect in the distribution process.
•    Wilkinson and Son, I nc. v. Providence Washington Ins. Co.,
307 A .2d 639 ( N.J. Super. 1973) . Damage to several
apartments constituted a single occurrence when all involved
the same cause, which was a contractor tracking paint on
carpets.
On the other hand, when the disparate injuries are separated in time
or result from variables that are not common to each claim, courts are
more likely to find that each job was a separate occurrence. Examples
of this reasoning occur in the following cases:
•    Johns on C orp. v. Indemnity Ins. Co. of North America, 164
N.E.2d 704 ( N.Y. 1959) . Collapsing walls at a construction site
were held to result from separate events when they werenegligently constructed by different individuals at different
times.
•    Lennar  Corp. v. Great American Ins. Co., 200 S .W.3d 651
(Tex. App. 2006) . Each home that suffered construction defect
claims due to EIFS was a separate occurrence.
•    Mid-Continent Cas. Co. v. Basedeo, 2012 U .S. App. L EXIS
11864 ( 11th Cir. June 12, 2012) . That water damage suffered by
a condominium complex as the result of Hurricane Wilma in
2005 i nvolved three different occurrences as the faulty tarping,
damage to the building’s mansard, and injury to a flat-top roof
had different causes.
•    U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. Safeco Ins. Co., 444 S o. 2d 844 ( Ala.
1983) . Property damage resulting separately from a leaking roof
and a contractor’s subsequent failure to fix the roof had two
causes. Therefore, two separate occurrences were involved.
•    Vande nberghe v. Amco Ins. Co., No. C-91-3885 M HP, 1992
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10760 ( N.D. Cal. July 10, 1992) .
Homeowners’ claims against a plumber for negligent pipe
installations involved diverse occurrences because different
physical factors caused each claimant’s loss, despite the fact
that the work all was performed under one contract.
An intermediate approach is suggested by Home Ind. Co. v. City of
Mobile, 749 F.2d 659 (11th Cir. 1984) , in which the City of Mobile was
sued by numerous homeowners for failing to properly maintain the
municipal drainage system, which resulted in significant flood damage
after three rainstorms. Home contended that the number of occurrences
should be determined by the number of storms, while the city argued that
the court should look at the specific circumstances of each claim. While
agreeing that the cause of the claims (and not the number of claimants)
was determinative, the Eleventh Circuit, applying Alabama law,
adopted an intermediate position, holding that each discrete causative
act of negligence was a separate occurrence. Therefore, if the city’s
failure to maintain a particular drain had floode d ten homes, thoselosses would be subject to the same $100,000 occurrence limit. If a
separate act of negligence had independently injured a different home or
homes, a separate policy limit would apply.
Likewise, in Kvaerner ES, Inc. v. One Beacon Ins. Co., 2005 Phila.
Ct. Com. Pl. LEXIS 377 (Pa. August 19, 2005) , the Philadelphia Court
of Common Pleas ruled that the various personal injury claims brought
against an insured that had constructed various furnaces could be
grouped together as an occurrence for each construction site where the
exposures had occurred. Although the insurers had argued that all of the
asbestos-related claims were caused by a single occurrence, that is to
say the continuous or repeated exposure to asbestos fibers, the Court of
Common Pleas held that the insured’s conduct did not arise from a
single negligent practice such as distributing a uniformly defective
product, but rather, involved the construction of furnaces at different
sites at different times and varying lengths of times. Accordingly, the
court ruled that the claimants that were exposed to asbestos at the same
location and same time were exposed to “substantially the same general
conditions.”
In New York, however, the First Department refused to find that a
manufacturer must pay a separate per occurrence deductible for each
individual asbestos claim against it. In Mt. McKinley Ins. Co. v.
Corning, Inc., 2012 NY slip op 04398 (App. Div. June 7, 2012) , the
Appellate Division found that factual issues remained with respect to
whether these claimants could be grouped together as involving
exposures in the same time and place and distinguished cases in which
courts had found multiple occurrences under policies that didn’t define
occurrences or lacked language requiring that exposures to similar
conditions “shall be considered as arising out of one occurrence.”
The California Court of Appeal ruled in Safeco Ins. Co. of
America v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co., B1877 43 (Cal. App. March 14,
2007)  that a neighbor’s claim for damage in the loss of his property due
to accumulated dirt and debris that had spilled onto his land from the
insured’s property in the course of a landslide triggered only a single
occurrence limit at the time of the landslide notwithstanding the fact thatproperty damage had continued in successive years owing to the
insured’s failure to clean up the property. The Second District declared
that the ensuing damage had only a single cause (the landslide) and that
the continuation of the original damage into subsequent policy years,
including the plaintiff’s loss of use of the property, did not give rise to
multiple occurrences. The court therefore rejected the arguments of
Safeco, which had provided excess coverage to the homeowner at the
time of the landslide, that the insured’s loss should be allocated through
successive primary policies issued by Fireman’s Fund. The court also
took note of the potential significance of the distinction between the all
sums language in a CGL policy, as construed by the California Supreme
Court in Montrose, and the homeowner’s policies at issue here which
merely required the insured to “pay up to our limit of insurance” for
each occurrence, “the damages for which the insured is legally liable.”
In this case, the court held that there was only one occurrence and that
the insurer was therefore only obligated to pay a single occurrence
limit.
Discrimination Claims: Housing and Employment
Claims involving housing or employment discrimination on the basis
of gender or race again raise the issue of the number of occurrences.
The question is whether each claimant should be a separate occurrence
due to the unique circumstances of her injuries or whether multiple
claims may be aggregated because they arise out of ongoing conduct or
the operation of a particular practice or guideline.
At times the insured’s liability results from the adoption of a
particular practice—the signing of a specific contract or some other
action that leads inevitably to the resulting claims. Some courts treat this
decision or act as the cause of the ensuing claims. Such cases typically
arise in actions against employers for race or sex discrimination.
When this is the situation, a number of courts have adopted a fateful
decision analysis similar to that used in certain products liability cases.
This reasoning holds that the insured’s promulgation of the offendingguideline caused the resulting claims. The leading guideline case is
Appalachian Ins. Co. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 676 F.2d 56 (3rd Cir.
1982) , in which Liberty Mutual was sued for sex discrimination by a
class of female employees. The Third Circuit ruled that the claims all
arose out of the insured’s adoption of discriminatory employment
guidelines and therefore involved a single occurrence in the policy year
that the guidelines were adopted. The case involved coverage under an
umbrella liability policy.
Similarly, the Eleventh Circuit has issued an unpublished opinion
affirming a holding of a federal district court in Florida that allegations
that the Broward County Sheriff’s Office violated the civil rights of
various individuals who were engaging in a mass protest of the Free
Trade Area of the Americas involved numerous separate occurrences
for which the insured was liable pursuant to self-insured retentions. In
State National Ins. Co. v. Lamberti, 2010 U.S. App. LEXIS 1455 (11th
Cir. January 21, 2010) , the court rejected the insured’s argument that the
occurrence limitations in the State National policy did not apply to the
applicable limits of personal injury coverage for offenses. As a result,
the court concluded that under Florida law, the claims, which involved
separate lawsuits by many different plaintiffs all of whom had their own
interactions with members of the sheriff’s office, represented more than
one occurrence in keeping with cases such as Koikos. The court ruled
that the immediate cause of the plaintiffs’ injuries was not a single
coordinated police action, but rather, individual assaults by police
officers at different times and places.
Other guideline cases include:
•    City of Portsmouth v. Colonial Penn Ins. Co., 769 F . Supp. 424
(D.N.H. 1990) . Separate instances of employment
discrimination arose out of a single employment policy
guideline and constituted only one occurrence despite the
ongoing nature of the damages. This case applies an errors and
omissions coverage endorsement.•    Transport Ins. Co. v. Lee Way Motor Freight Co., 487 F . Supp.
1325 ( N.D. Tex. 1980) . Forty-seven instances of race
discrimination at four separate locations over a period of  years
arose out of a single “pattern and practice” of discrimination
and thus involved one occurrence. Note that policy had a
$25,000 pe r occurrence deductible. Again, this case involved
an excess umbrella liability policy.
•    Village Manage ment, Inc. v. Hartford Acc. & Ind. C o., 662 F .
Supp. 1366 ( N.D. Ill. 1987) . Race discrimination claims against
a landlord all arose out of one occurrence, the insured’s
adoption of a discriminatory policy for selecting tenants. The
case involves personal injury coverage on a commercial
package policy.
In these cases, the resulting claims often are treated as a single
occurrence in the year in which the guideline or practice first harms the
plaintiffs. This conclusion is quite striking given the fact that many
members of the class may not have been employed when the guideline
was first adopted or may have suffered injury in different times and
places.
On the other hand, the court ruled in Illinois Central Railroad C o. v.
Acc. & Cas. Co. of Winterthur, 739 N.E.2d 1049 (Ill. App. 2000)  that
each individual member of a class action for employment discrimination
is a separate occurrence. The court rejected the insured’s claim that the
class action was based on a single, continuing practice of
discrimination and should trigger only a single self-insured retention.
When more than one guideline or practice generates liability, the
available limits of coverage may increase. In Mead Reinsurance v.
Granite State Ins. Co., 873 F.2d 1185 (9th Cir. 1988) , a municipality
was named in several police brutality suits. Eleven of the cases were
based on the city’s alleged policy of condoning excessive force. While
ruling that the police brutality claims could be aggregated as a single
occurrence because they all arose out of the same policy, the court ruled
that a separate claim based on alleged police harassment arose out of adifferent type of conduct. Therefore, it constituted a different occurrence
under California law.
Decisions such as Mead should not be interpreted as requiring a
new occurrence every time a plaintiff’s complaint is amended to add a
new cause of action. Alternative legal theories that are based on the
same set of causative facts are not new causes. Thus, in Plante v.
Columbia Paints, 494 N.W.2d 140 (N.D. 1992) , an exploding can of
paint injured two painters who were both using the paint at the same
time. Although the plaintiffs’ suits alleged diverse theories of liabilities,
the North Dakota Supreme Court (applying Washington law) noted that
these legal theories did not cause the plaintiffs’ injuries and therefore
held that the claims involved only one occurrence.
Similarly, the court refused in Mid-Century Ins. Co. v. Shutt, 845
P.2d 86 (Kan. App. 1993)  to find that claims against a juvenile for
negligent operation of a motor vehicle and against the juvenile’s parents
for negligent entrustment constituted two occurrences merely because
they were based on different legal theories. In Guaranty National Ins.
Co. v. North River Ins. Co., 909 F.2d 133 (5th Cir. 1990) , a psychiatric
patient committed suicide by jumping out of hospital’s open window.
Even though the hospital was found liable on three theories of liability,
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ruled that only one policy
limit applied under Kansas law.
As seen from these cases, the fact that different legal theories arise
out of the same set of circumstances should not expand the number of
occurrences triggered by the claims.
Environmental Liability Claims
In general, waste site disputes concerning the number of occurrences
arise in cases in which there are 1) multiple sources of contamination at
a single site, 2) multiple sites, or 3) multiple claimants.Sources of Contamination at a Site
It is not uncommon for a hazardous waste site to become
contaminated through intermingled causes. Thus, a site may have
pollution from areas where wastes were buried or dumped onto the
ground, from spillage or leaks from storage tanks, or from lagoons
where liquid wastes were stored. These areas may differ not only in
their geography but also in the types of waste involved and the identity
of the parties responsible.
Number of Sites. Insureds may seek to aggregate sites based on a
common chemical, a common source, or a common transporter.
Identity of Claimants. There may be multiple claimants. This may
occur when, for example, property owners sue a facility or different
governmental agencies present diverse claims for response costs and
natural resource damages at a single site. Alternatively, an effort may be
made to aggregate separate sites when they are being treated as a single
site for governmental enforcement purposes.
What Is the Cause of Pollution Liabilities?
Single Site Claims. When a claim involves only one site, are the
number of occurrences determined by: a) separate spill incidents, b) the
type of pollutants involved at the site, c) the number of operable units,
or d) the particular areas of contamination? For instance, if a portion of
a site is contaminated as the result of ash from a former incinerator and
separate contamination exists on the site from underground tanks, should
the separate sources generate multiple occurrences? Or should all of the
contamination be treated as arising from exposure to the same or
substantially similar general conditions?
Multiple Site Claims. If more than one site is at issue, should each
site be treated separately? Or should the sites be aggregated based on:
a) the disposal of a specific hazardous chemical, b) transshipments from
one site to another, c) EPA treatment of the sites as a single investigationor enforcement action, or d) common ownership or operation of the
sites?
Case Law Examples
Single Site Cases. Just as courts have tended to treat pollution as a
continuous, indivisible injury, most courts have been reluctant to
separate out discrete polluting events at a single site as new
occurrences. The limited case law that exists tends to concur that waste
sites should be treated as a single occurrence. Thus, in Northern States
Power Co. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins. Co., 523 N.W.2d 657
(Minn. 1994), the court declared that, because soil and groundwater
contamination is a continuous process, the individual discharges of
contaminants are so “continuous and repetitive that the unidentifiable
individual instances have merged into one continuing occurrence.”
Similar reasoning is found in Endicott Johns on Corporation v. Liberty
Mutual Ins. Co., 928 F. Supp. 176 (N.D.N.Y. 1996) ; Consolidated
Edison Co. of New York, Inc. v. Employers Ins. Co. of Wausau, 1997
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18486 (S.D.N.Y. November 21, 1997) ; and Hercules
Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., No. 92C-10-105 (Del. Super. August 31,
1999) .
The Alabama Supreme Court ruled that PCB contamination due to
spills of lubricating fluids at thirteen of thirty-eight compressor stations
operated by the insured in conjunction with a gas pipeline that stretches
from Georgia to Texas all involve one occurrence. The court ruled in
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, London v . Sout hern Natural Gas Co.,
No. 1110698 (Ala. June 28, 2013) that there was only one cause as the
pollution had occurred from the use of the same lubricating fluid
(Pydraul) through an integrated, unitary pipeline as the result of uniform
plant operations, even though this one occurrence may cause disparate
and multiple impacts on individuals and properties extending over time.
In P.R. Mallory & Co., Inc. v. American Cas. Co., 920 N.E.2d 736
(Ind. App. 2010) , the Indiana Court of Appeals has declined to hold that
different pollution problems involving at the insured’s facility involvedseparate occurrences as to which different notice dates might have
applied. As the policies stated that “all bodily injury and property
damage arising out of continuous or repeated exposure to substantially
the same general condition shall be considered as arising out of one
occurrence,” the court found that claims involving a local municipality,
the U.S. EPA, and various homeowners all arose out of the same
occurrence.
A broader view of what constitutes an occurrence in the hazardous
waste context was adopted by a federal district court in Pennsylvania.
In Centennial Ins. Co. v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co., 677 F. Supp. 342
(E.D. Pa. 1987) , the court declared that the insured’s dumping of
hazardous waste at the same site on sixteen separate occasions was
each a new occurrence. The court ruled that the dates of the pollution
releases were reasonably identifiable and that the damage resulting
from each release was separate and distinct.
Multiple Site Claims. The leading case analyzing this fact pattern
remains Consolidated Edison Co. of New York, Inc. v. Employers Ins.
Co. of Wausau, 1997 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18486 (S.D.N.Y. November 21,
1997) . Consolidated Edison sought coverage for Superfund liabilities
arising out of the cleanup of two waste sites near Kansas City. During
the period in question, Con Ed had shipped mineral oil and capacitors
to the Envirosure site in Kansas City, Missouri, and PCB-contaminated
transformers to the Environmental Resource Management site in Kansas
City, Kansas. Both sites were operated by subsidiaries of PCB
Treatment, Inc. In 1994, the U.S. EPA designated Con Ed as a
potentially responsible party (PRP) at both sites. In 1996, Con Ed
entered into a single consent agreement to clean up the sites.
Con Ed sought coverage for the cost of undertaking this cleanup
under an excess liability policy. The policy provided coverage in the
amount of $1.5 million per occurrence in excess of underlying limits of
$4 million. The key issue, therefore, was whether the insured’s per
occurrence liabilities exceeded the $4 million retention. Con Ed argued
both claims arose out of the same occurrence because the pollution was
caused by the common “mishandling of PCBs” by PCB Treatment, Inc.at both sites. Further, it noted that the EPA had treated both sites as
being linked together and that the sites and activities conducted on them
were so similar that no meaningful distinction existed between them.
The excess carrier disagreed, contending that each site was a separate
occurrence.
Applying New York law, where Con Ed was based and where the
subject policies had been entered into, the court ruled that the pollution
at the two sites had separate causes and, therefore, the claims could not
be aggregated for insurance purposes. In reaching this conclusion, the
court successively rejected the insured’s argument that a finding of one
occurrence was mandated by: 1) the government’s treatment of the
claims, 2) the facts concerning the interrelationship between the sites, or
3) the wording in the excess policy.
The court found that the EPA’s linking of the sites together for
administrative convenience did not mean that the sites were a “unitary
whole for purposes of investigation and cleanup.” In fact, the record
established that the government had imposed different procedures and
requirements for the investigation and cleanup of the two sites and had
not treated them as a single facility. Whether the two sites were
considered one for purposes of the EPA’s investigation was a question
of administrative procedure and federal law; the interpretation of the
number of occurrences was a function of contract interpretation and
state law.
The court also disagreed that the pollution processes at the sites
were so similar that they mandated a finding of a common cause. In this
case, the insured had used the sites for different purposes and had
shipped different wastes that required different treatment to them.
Finally, the court rejected Con Ed’s contention that policy language
that “damages arising out of exposure to substantially the same general
conditions shall be considered as arising out of the same occurrence”
applied to the case. The court ruled that the pollution of the two sites
did not arise from “substantially the same general conditions” but,
rather, was caused by separate contamination and mishandling of PCBs
at each site. On the other hand, the court noted that the cited languagewas significant because it would require aggregation of all the spills at
a single site in a given year.
Arguments for aggregation sometimes are advanced by insurers. In
Indiana Gas Co., Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 951 F. Supp. 773 (N.D.
Ind. 1996) , a gas utility sought coverage from its liability insurance for
nine manufactured gas plants that had developed environmental
liabilities. Aetna contended that the most that it could owe in indemnity
was a single policy limit, despite the number of plants and the fact that it
had issued coverage to Indiana Gas over a period of years. The court
denied Aetna’s motion for summary judgment, noting that the gas plants
had utilized different types of gas manufacturing processes, had
employed different structures and materials, and had been operated by
different entities. The court refused to find as a matter of law that the
cause of the overall environmental liabilities was the insured’s “long
term business practices in operating its MGP sites.”
In E.I. duPont de Nemours v. Admiral Ins. Co., No. 89C-AU-99,
1996 Del. Super. LEXIS 137 (April 9, 1996) , a state trial court in
Delaware was asked whether environmental liabilities arising out of the
insured’s legal liability to clean up a manufacturing facility and an off-
site landfill could be aggregated as a single occurrence. The landfill
was located less than two miles from the factory and had received
waste material from it. Nevertheless, the court ruled that the claims
involved two separate premises locations and refused to permit
aggregation on the basis of “continuous or repeated exposure to
substantially the same general condition existing at or emanating from
one premises location.”
In City of Seattle v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyds, King No. 97-
2-15939 (Wash. Super. January 28, 1998) , a court granted Allstate’s
motion for partial summary judgment, declaring that Allstate, as an
excess insurer, had no duty to drop down over the underlying insolvent
policies. Since each site was a separate occurrence, the amounts at
issue were less than the retention limit for the excess policy.
In Endicott Johns on Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 928 F. Supp.
176 (N.D.N.Y. 1996) , a waste generator sought recovery for the cost ofresponding to a PRP letter involving the disposal of waste at the
Endicott Landfill and the Tri-Cities Barrel sites in New York between
1957 and 1983. Even though the insured’s discrete disposal activity
separately caused property damage throughout the period in question,
the court ruled that the dumping at each site constituted separate
occurrences. On the other hand, the court declined to find that each
separate act of disposal was a new occurrence. The court ruled that the
cause of the insured’s liability was its disposal of waste at each site.
In Domtar, Inc. v. Niagar a Fire Ins. Co., A03, 630 (Minn. App.
March 2, 2004) (unpublished), the Minnesota Court of Appeals rejected
the insured’s argument that six separate sites could be aggregated. In an
unpublished opinion, the Court of Appeals ruled that the trial court had
not erred in refusing to aggregate the six sites as a single occurrence
despite the insured’s argument that they were an “integrated business
unit, with uniform and standardized procedures….” Rather, the court
found it more likely that the varied activities at Domtar’s
“geographically and geologically distinct sites” involved separate
occurrences even if the sites were operated by affiliated corporate
entities.
In Caldo Oil Co. v. State Water Resources Control Board, 44 Cal.
App. 4th 1821 (1996) , the California Court of Appeal ruled that
separate leaking underground storage tanks operated on adjacent parcels
by the same insured nonetheless represented two “occurrences” for
purposes of obtaining up to $990,000 “per occurrence” reimbursement
for the State Water Resources Control Board.
In contrast to these cases, the California Court of Appeal declared
in Garamendi v. Mission Ins. Co., 131 Cal.App.4t h 30 (2005)  that a
lower court erred in concluding as a matter of law that two nearby
facilities that were both owned and operated by one Rudolph Kraus did
not necessarily involve separate occurrences in light of the intermingled
means of operation and the fact that even the U.S. EPA viewed the sites
as linked. The court did not resolve the number of occurrences issue;
however, as it separately concluded that the court had also erred in
declaring that aggregate language in the underlying TransamericaInsurance policy (to which the insolvent Mission excess policy
followed form) lacked an applicable aggregate. Whereas the lower
court had concluded that language in the Mission policy that made it
subject to the aggregate listed in the policy Declarations for each annual
period during the currency of this policy, separately in respect of
Products Liability and in respect of “occupational injury” indicated that
only products and occupational injury claims were subject to an
aggregate, the Court of Appeal ruled that this language merely indicated
that there was a separate annual aggregate limit for those types of
claims, and adopted the insured’s (Industrial Trucking) contention that
the Mission policy should be triggered once all other claim payments,
either singly or together, that did not involve products or occupational
injuries reached a total of $1.5 million in any year. The California Court
of Appeal noted that the only other case in the country that had analyzed
these issues was the Washington Supreme Court’s 2002 opinion in
Weyerhaeuser, a case in which the Washington Supreme Court had split
5-4, and adopted the view of the dissenting justices in Weyerhaeuser
that the underlying property damage insurance coverage was subject to a
separate aggregate limit. The analyses was undertaken pursuant to
California law, notwithstanding the fact that the sites were located in
New Jersey and the insured in Pennsylvania, as the Court of Appeal
declared that it was appropriate to apply its own law in the absence of
any suggestion that the law of New Jersey or Pennsylvania would lead
to a different conclusion. As a result, the court concluded that the
Commissioner of Insurance, as the liquidator for Mission, was
responsible for all of the liabilities in the subject policy year over the
$1.5 million underlying limit, thus avoiding the issue of whether the two
underlying claims should be treated as a single occurrence in order to
maximize the insured’s claim under the excess policy.
A federal district court ruled that various fires, explosions and other
pollution incidents occurring over a period of years at the insured’s oil
refinery in Shreveport, Louisiana did not involve “related Pollution
Conditions” and therefore required a separate $2 million deductible as
to each incident. In Pennzoil-Quaker State Co. v. American
International Specialty Lines Ins. Co., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80645
(S.D. Tex. September 4, 2009) , the court held that whether the claimswere interpreted in accordance with the law of Texas or Louisiana, the
allegations of pollution in the five underlying suits alleged distinct kinds
of emissions and releases with distinct causes and therefore could not
be grouped together. The court noted it could go beyond the
conventional “eight corners” test under Texas law but found it
unnecessary in order to reach this conclusion because the allegations of
the underlying suits made clear that the various losses involved separate
occurrences.
In Indemnity Ins. Co. v. North American City of Tacoma, 2010
Wash. App. LEXIS 2427 (Wash. App. November 1, 2010)
(unpublished), the Washington Court of Appeals rejected the insured’s
argument that pollution liability claims had resulted from separate
occurrences (the building of the dam and the accumulation of sediment),
neither of which were expected or anticipated.
Reinsurance Disputes. As might be expected, the substantial sums
that insurers have paid and the odd nature of environmental liability
claims have prompted disputes between decedents and reinsurers.
These mainly deal with the number of retentions that must be satisfied
and whether a reinsurer may aggregate multiple site claims to more
quickly access a reinsurance recovery.
In Travelers Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s,
716 N.Y.S.2d 297 (App. Div. 000), aff’d, No. 123/124 (N.Y. October
16, 2001) , Travelers sued Lloyd’s seeking indemnification under
reinsurance agreements for pollution-related losses involving 150
hazardous waste sites around the country that had been the subject of a
comprehensive settlement between Travelers and its policyholder,
Koppe rs Company. In a separate proceeding, Travelers sued to recover
monies that it paid to settle a multi-site pollution case with E.I. duPont.
In both cases, Travelers had treated each individual site as a
separate occurrence in allocating the payments among its policies but
argued that they could be grouped together for reinsurance purposes
because the claims all had a common origin as being traceable to the
same error or mistake; namely the insured’s company-wide waste
disposal practice. The treaties in question called for the payment of“each and every loss” for “disaster and/or casualty” which was defined
as “each and every accident, occurrence and/or causative incident, it
being further understood that all loss resulting from a series of
accidents, occurrences and/or causative incidents having a common
origin and/or being traceable to the same act, omission, error and/or
mistake shall be considered as having resulted from a single accident,
occurrence and/or causative incident.”
The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of New York ruled
that Travelers could not aggregate multiple environmental claims for the
purpose of a reinsurance cession. The First Department stated that, “The
lower court correctly concluded that [Travelers] cannot meet its burden
of establishing a single unifying cause for its separate claims to justify
the submission of the policyholder’s distinct claims as a single loss for
purposes of the reinsurance policies.”
These findings were affirmed by the New York Court of Appeals on
October 16, 2001. The Court of Appeals held that the “series” language
required that the “accidents, occurrences and/or causative incidents”
have a spatial or temporal relationship to one another as well as a
“common origin.” In short, the court concluded “that the parties did not
intend for the reinsured to simply group together all other losses as a
single ‘disaster and/or casualty,’ but sought to allow aggregation only
where the losses are linked spatially or temporally and share a
‘common origin.’” Where, as here, “Travelers seeks to attribute events
and losses separated spatially by thousands of miles and temporally by
decades to a single ”disaster and/or casualty,” the Court of Appeals
ruled that the claim could not be supported by the language of the
reinsurance treaties in question. In light of the fact that none of the
individual sites claims pierced the retention levels for these reinsurance
treaties, the court declared that summary judgment was properly granted
in favor of the reinsurers.
To similar effect is Allstate Ins. Co. v. American Home Assurance
Co., 2007 N.Y. slip. op. 05170 (App. Div. June 12, 2007) , in which the
Appellate Division ruled that a facultative reinsurer was not obliged to
accept American Home’s cession of its payments to UnitedTechnologies to resolve environmental liability claims around the
country on a “one site/one occurrence basis where such arguments were
inconsistent with the ”multiple occurrences” position that the insurer
had used against UTC in the original coverage litigation, a case in
which AIG had also obtained a ruling for one of the sites that separate
operations and contamination at the site involve multiple occurrences.
Unlike the trial court, the Appellate Division was not swayed by a
single occurrence analysis that had been prepared after the fact by
coverage counsel. Rather, the court declared that, “A reinsurer is not
bound by the follow the fortunes doctrine where the reinsured’s
settlement allocation, at odds  with its allocation of the loss with its
insured, designed to minimize its loss, reflects an effort to maximize
unreasonably the amount of collectible reinsurance.” The Appellate
Division also ruled that American Home’s argument that there was an
“industry practice of ceding pollution claims to reinsurers on a single
occurrence per site basis” was not only unsubstantiated but inconsistent
with its own evidence.
Claimed inconsistencies between the manner in which cedents count
the number of occurrences for the purpose of resolving claims with their
policyholders and in the manner in which they calculate their loss for
reinsurance purposes were also presented in Stonewall Insurance
Company  v. Argonaut  Insurance Company , 73 F.Supp.2d 893 (N.D. Ill.
1999) . Stonewall brought this action against Argonaut seeking a
declaration that it did not owe coverage under a reinsurance contract
issued to Argonaut for a settlement that Argonaut had entered into with
Hughes Aircraft resolving its insurance claim for pollution at the
Fullerton site in California. Argonaut had insured Hughes under a 1970-
1971 policy that lacked a pollution exclusion as well as a policy in
effect from 1972- 1975 that contained a pollution exclusion. Stonewall
had issued three facultative certificates with respect to this 1972-1975
insurance. Argonaut ceded the claim on the basis of a single occurrence
even though another insurer had been found to owe coverage for four
occurrences in a separate coverage suit involving the same site.
Stonewall disputed this cession, questioning whether it had been
entered into reasonably or in good faith. Further, Stonewall contended
that Argonaut contended that the settlement should have been enteredinto on the basis of six occurrences involving discrete causes of
contamination at the Fullerton site. These issues were tried before the
U.S. District Court in early 1999. On December 3, 1999, following a
three week trial, the jury entered a verdict in favor of Argonaut and
against Stonewall in the amount of $2.5 million on its breach of contract
claim, $6 million for Stonewall’s breach of the duty of good faith and
fair dealing, and $7 million in punitive damages on its claim that
Stonewall had breached its duty of utmost good faith. In particular, the
jury made factual findings that Stonewall had not settled on the basis of
multiple occurrences or because of its alleged exposure to bad faith
liability to Hughes, nor had it acted unreasonably in its cession.
Stonewall argued that Argonaut was collaterally estoppe d to claim
that the settlement was based on a single occurrence in light of the fact
that a single issue had been litigated against another insurer of Hughes
with the result that the jury had found four separate occurrences. The
court agreed with Stonewall that the jury’s verdict did not moot
Stonewall’s motion for summary judgment as the legal issue had to be
resolved by the court. While, therefore, rejecting the Magistrate’s
recommendation that the motion be declared moot, the court nonetheless
denied the motion as being without merit. The District Court concluded
that Argonaut was not in privity with the insurers in the other coverage
case and that the doctrine of collateral estoppe l, therefore, did not
apply.
The Louisiana Court of Appeal ruled in Devillier v. Alpine
Exploration Co., No. 06-0770 (La. App. December 29, 2006)  that the
“per claim” retention in an insurance policy was ambiguous and
therefore only required an oil well operator to pay a single retention
despite the fact that numerous individual claims were brought against it
for personal injuries and property damage arising out of a well
explosion. Despite a trial court’s declaration that the policy clearly
required the insured to pay a separate $100,000 “per claim” self-
insured retention for each individual claimant, the court found that the
Limits of Insurance section of the contractor’s Pollution Liability
Coverage Endorsement was ambiguous as suggesting that the number of
claims should be defined by reference to the number of pollutionconditions. Where, as here, there was a single pollution condition, the
court found that only one claim should apply.
Molestation and Sexual Assault Claims
Sexual molestation claims most frequently have arisen in the context
of day-care centers and religious institutions. As the molesters
intentional acts generally preclude coverage for them, coverage
litigation for such claims has tended to focus on the employers or groups
charged with negligence for failing to prevent such assaults. As will be
shown, this distinction between perpetrators and supervisors can be
crucial in determining the number of available policy limits.
One Occurrence: Failure to Prevent Abuse
In cases where claims have been filed against entities for failing to
prevent abuse, courts sometimes have found a single occurrence based
on the insured’s failure to perform a duty.
In Interstate Fire & Casualty Co. v. Archdiocese of Portland, 747
F. Supp. 618 (D. Ore. 1990) , rev’d, 35 F.3d 1325 (9th Cir. 1994) , the
court ruled that the number of occurrences was not determined by each
act of molestation, but, rather, by the event giving rise to the
Archdiocese’s liability. This was the continuous negligence in retaining
and supervising the priest, which was a single occurrence. On appeal,
the Ninth Circuit disagreed, holding that the victim suffered separate
injuries from the different acts of molestation and finding a new
occurrence in each year that molestation had occurred. On remand, the
U.S. District Court held the insured responsible for an individual
retention in each of the four triggered policy years. Interstate Fire &
Cas. Co. v. Archdiocese of Portland, 899 F . Supp. 498 ( D. Ore. 1995) .
In Washoe County v. Transcontinental Ins. Co., 878 P.2d 306 (Nev.
1994) , the Nevada Supreme Court ruled that the county’s negligence in
licensing a day-care center in which forty children were molested overa three-year-period was only one occurrence. The basis for the
insured’s liability was its single ongoing failure to perform its legal
duty to properly monitor and regulate the center’s operations. The court
distinguished this case from its earlier ruling in INA v. Rubin, 818 P.2d
389 (Nevada 1991) , which had held that each occasion on which an
insured physician negligently failed to diagnose a young girl’s brain
tumor was a separate occurrence. In INA the county was being held
liable for its failure to perform a single duty, not for discrete acts. The
fact that the county’s policy contained a $50,000 per occurrence
retention was perhaps not coincidental to the ruling.
Arguably, a different conclusion might be reached if an institution
were held vicariously liable for the torts of its employee. However,
courts have been reluctant to find that sexual assaults are within the
scope of employment and have not imputed liability to the employer on
this basis. For example, see Houg v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 509
N.W.2d 590 ( Minn. App. 1993) .
Some earlier cases had avoided this issue altogether by adopting the
so-called first encounter trigger, which restricts coverage to the policy
in effect when the first assault or sexual encounter occurred.
By and large, this approach has been rejected in recent years. In
particular, the District Court’s 1993 ruling in Lee v. Interstate Fire &
Cas. Co., 826 F. Supp. 1156 (N.D. Ill. 1993) was rejected on appeal in
Lee v. Interstate Fire & Cas. Co., 86 F.3d 101 (7th Cir. 1996) . The
Seventh Circuit ruled that the claims of negligent supervision against the
archdiocese were a separate occurrence in each year that misconduct
was alleged. A first encounter rule was similarly rejected in Roman
Catholic Diocese of Joliet, Inc. v. Interstate Fire Ins. Co., 685 N.E.2d
932 (Ill. App. 1st Div. 1997) , which involved claims for negligent
supervision constituting an occurrence in each policy period in which
molestation continued.
One Occurrence per Policy YearMost courts have ruled that a separate occurrence limit is triggered
in each year when molestation occurred. For example, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held in Society of Roman Catholic
Diocese of Lafayette v. Interstate Fire & Cas. Co., 26 F.3d 1359 (5th
Cir. 1994), that the molestation of thirty-one children over a period of
years should trigger coverage in each year that incidents took place.
Only the incidents within a policy year could be aggregated.
The New York Court of Appeals ruled in Roman Catholic Diocese
of Brooklyn v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, PA, 21
N.Y.3d 139, 991 N.E.2d 666, 969 N.Y.S.2d 808 (2013)  that sexual
abuse that occurred over a period of many years involved multiple
occurrences and should be allocated on a pro rata basis among each of
the policy years when abuse took place. The court found that there was
no single “unfortunate event” as the incidents of sexual abuse had
occurred over a span of six years and took place in multiple locations;
thus lacking the temporal and spatial closeness necessary to support a
finding of one occurrence. In Safeguard Ins. Co. v. Angel Guardian
Home, 946 F. Supp. 221 (E.D.N.Y. 1996) , a federal district court ruled
that allegations that foster children were subjected to sexual abuse over
a period of years involved an occurrence in each year in which the
abuse occurred. The court rejected the insurer’s contention that the
insured’s liability arose solely from its negligent placement of children
in the foster home.
In National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Lynette C., 33 Cal. Rptr.2d 496
(1994) , the California Court of Appeals ruled that a foster parent’s
negligent failure to protect a child from sexual molestation by the other
foster parent triggered a separate claim limit in each of the policy years
during which the negligent acts occurred.
In TIG Insurance Company  v. San Antonio YMCA, No. 04-04-
00017 (Tex. App. July 13, 2005 ), the Texas Court of Appeals held that
even though TIG had contributed $1 million towards the settlement of
various sexual abuse claims involving a YMCA counselor, it had a
continuing duty to defend owing to the possibility that certain of the
claims might potentially be construed as involving physical abuse thatdid not contain any “sexual” element. The court rejected the insured’s
contention that the sexual abuse occurrence endorsement was not meant
to supersede the occurrence language and separate limits might
therefore be available. To the contrary, the court ruled that all of the
claims involving this particular perpetrator were subject to a single
occurrence limit for sexual abuse claims.
Multiple Locations or Perpetrators as Separate
Occurrences
Several courts have found multiple occurrences based on the
number of claimants or the disparate manner in which the assaults
occurred.
In a Texas case, the Fifth Circuit ruled in H.E. Butt Grocery Co. v.
National Union Fire Ins. Co., 150 F.3d 526 (5th Cir. 1998)  that two
separate sexual assaults by a store employee were separate occurrences
when applying a self-insured retention. Even though the claims were
based on the insured’s negligent failure to supervise, the court declared
that the immediate cause of the underlying injuries was the employee’s
intervening intentional tort. In addition to its refusal to find ambiguity in
the meaning of occurrence in this context, the Fifth Circuit took note of
the fact that the insured could have purchased an endorsement that
would have aggregated such conduct as a single occurrence.
In Worcester Ins. Co. v. Fells Acres Day School, Inc., 558 N.E.2d
958 (Mass. 1990) , the Supreme Judicial Court ruled that claims against
a day-care center involved more than one occurrence, since the sexual
assaults were by various individuals at diverse locations and times.
Each Child a New Occurrence
Similarly, several courts have ruled that the molestation of each
child is a separate occurrence because the process of injury and the
circumstances of molestation differ from individual to individual. Thisis illustrated in Preferred Risk Mutual Ins. Co. v. Watson, 937 S.W.2d
148 (Tex. App. 1997) , in which allegations that three children were
molested by an employee of a day-care center were subject to a
separate occurrence limit for each child.
S.F. v. West American Ins. Co., 463 S.E.2d 450 (Va. 1995) ,
involved an apartment building owner who was sued by seven plaintiffs
who had been sexually assaulted by the insured’s property manager. The
Virginia Supreme Court held the meaning of occurrence was ambiguous
in that it could extend to the insured’s hiring, supervision, or negligent
retention of the molester. Under these circumstances, the court ruled that
the claims could not be restricted to a single policy limit and were each
a separate occurrence. However, the court refused to find that each
separate molestation incident was a new occurrence.
Impact of Aggregating Provisions
The occurrences issue may be mooted by more recent policies that
provide specific coverage for such claims but insulate the insurer by
including a separate indemnity sublimit. Thus, when a policy contains a
separate sublimit providing that all acts of sexual misconduct by a
single individual would be considered a single occurrence, the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit held that claims by multiple
individuals who were molested must nonetheless all be considered part
of the same occurrence. See Kansas State Bank & Trust v. Midwest
Mutual Ins. Co., No. 93- 3066, 1994 W L 192035 ( 10th Cir. 1994) .
Nursing Home Claims
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, interpreting Texas
law, has ruled that various different acts of negligence over the course
of several years involved separate occurrences under a policy
providing both professional liability and general liability insurance. In
Royal Ins. Co. of America v. Caliber One Indemnity Co., 465 F.3d 614
(5th Cir. 2006) , the court held that the CGL “conditions” language couldnot be construed to encompass separate acts of negligence by nurses and
doctors at the facility. The court observed that the “continuous or
repeated exposure to conditions” language in the policy was designed to
deal with physical conditions at the premises rather than the separate
negligent acts of caregivers. The court cited a similar holding in an
earlier sexual abuse case, declaring that “continuous or repeated
exposure to conditions sounds like language designed to deal with
asbestos fibers in the air, or lead-based paint on the walls, rather than
with priests and choirboys.” In this case, the court held that the acts and
omissions that caused the patient’s stage four pressure sores, pneumonia
and other injuries culminating in her death were divisible from the acts
and om issions that resulted in earlier bruises and sores.
Shooting and Criminal Assault Claims
Apart from these sexual molestation cases, there are numerous
situations in which courts have been called upon to determine whether
separate criminal acts involve one or more occurrences. As before, the
resolution of this issue sometimes turns on the identity of the insured. In
other cases, courts have focused on the specific physical circumstances
of the incident in assessing whether the victims’ injuries shared a
common cause.
In several cases, courts have focused on the nature of the insured’s
liability in finding that multiple shooting incidents all arose out of the
same occurrence.
In Travelers Ind. Co. v. Olive’s Spor ting Goods , 297 Ark. 516, 764
S.W.2d 596 (1989) , a sporting goods  store was sued by several
individuals who were injured after a person to whom the store had sold
a gun went on a shooting spree. In these circumstances, the Arkansas
Supreme Court held that all of the claims against the insured arose out
of the same occurrence, which is to say the insured’s sale of the gun.
Likewise, the Massachusetts Appeals Court has ruled that various
suits against a college for failing to prevent a shooting spree by aderanged student all arose out of a single occurrence. In RLI Ins. Co. v.
Simon’s Rock Early College, 54 Mass. App. Ct. 286 (2002) , the court
rejected RLI’s contention that its umbrella policy obligations would not
arise until the $3 million aggregate limit in American Alliance’s
primary policy was exhausted, holding instead that the primary insurer
only owed a single $1 million occurrence limit. As the claims against
the college were for negligence, the Appeals Court held that the cause
of the victim’s injuries was the insured’s negligent failure to keep the
student from using his gun to shoot them.
Most recently, the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior
Court has ruled that claims against a homeowner for injuries suffered in
an incident where the insured’s adult son shot at various police officers
on three occasions, injuring several officers, constitute a single
occurrence. In Bomba v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 379 N.J. Super.
589, 879 A.2d 1252 (2005) , the court rejected the insured’s contention
that each separate gunshot was a new occurrence, holding instead that
inasmuch as the claims against the insured were based upon their
negligence in allowing their son access to gun, the underlying injuries
all shared the same cause.
On the other hand, several cases have found multiple occurrences
under similar circumstances.
In American Ind. Co. v. McQuaig, 435 So.2d 414 (Fla. App. 1983) ,
a homeowner engaged in a shoot-out with the police, injuring three
officers with successive shotgun blasts. The District Court of Appeals
held that each shotgun blast was a separate occurrence.
In New Hampshire Insurance Company  v. RLI Insurance Company ,
807 So.2d 171 (Fla. DCA 3 2002) , a tenant in the insured’s apartment
building fired three separate shots at different times and places inside
the apartment complex, injuring three individuals and killing two. The
families of the victims sued the apartment building owner alleging that
he had been negligent in failing to provide proper security that might
have precluded such events from occurring. The Third Circuit of the
Florida District Court of Appeal concluded that each separate incident
was a different occurrence. The Florida District Court of Appeals ruledthat “the act which causes the damage constitutes the occurrence.” The
Third District concluded that:
there were three separate acts of shooting, causing three separate
injuries to three separate persons in three separate instances. This
is not a case with one proximate, uninterrupted continuing cause
resulting in the deaths and injuries but rather three separate causes.
New Hampshire did not incur any liability because of the
aggressor’s residence, but rather liability attached when the
aggressor fired three shots which resulted in injury to the three
victims.
Relying on McQuaig and RLI, the Florida Supreme Court ruled in
2003 that allegations of a restaurateur’s negligence in failing to prevent
an incident in which an aggrieved patron successively shot several
patrons constituted multiple occurrences. In the absence of a policy
definition of “accident,” the Florida Supreme Court answered a
certified question for the Eleventh Circuit in Koikos v. Travelers
Insurance Company , 849 So.2d 263 (Fla. 2003)  that the cause of the
claims was the physical discharge of the firearm. The court rejected
Travelers’ contention that the relevant consideration was the single
omission of its policyholder in failing to provide proper security.
Further, the court refused to find that the “continuous and repeated
exposure to conditions” language was relevant in considering the acts or
omissions of the policyholder for which it was deemed to be legally
responsible, ruling instead that this language was intended to broaden
the scope of earlier coverage so as to clearly afford coverage for
incidents in which injuries resulted from environmental exposures or
other conditions that occurred ove r an extended period of  time.
The court concluded that the inclusion of the “continuous or
repeated exposure” language does not restrict the definition of
occurrence but rather expands it by including ongoing and slowly
developing injuries, such as those in the field of toxic torts. Therefore,
the court reject Travelers’ reliance on the “continuous or repeated
exposure” language as a basis for concluding that Koikos’ negligent
failure to provide security constitutes a single occurrence under theterms of the policy. The victims were not “exposed” to the negligent
failure to provide security. If the victims were “exposed” to anything, it
was the bullets fired from the intruder’s gun.
The Florida Supreme Court declared that “it is the act that causes
the damage, which is neither expected nor intended from the standpoint
of the insured that constitutes the occurrence.” The court found that
“focusing on the immediate cause—that is the act that causes the
damage, rather than the underlying tort—that is the insured’s negligence,
is also consistent with the interpretation of other forms of insurance
policies.”
Pennsylvania’s intermediate appellate court ruled 5-3 in Donegal
Ins. Co. v. Baumhammers, 2006 PA Super. 32 (Pa. Super. Feb. 2006)
that a shooting spree in which the insured’s son fatally shot five people
and wounded another involved six separate occurrences. On appeal,
however, a similarly divided Supreme Court held that the claims
involved a single occurrence. In Donegal Mut. Ins. Co. v.
Baumhammers, 938 A.2d 286 (Pa. 2007) , the Supreme Court held that
the appropriate focus of a cause analysis was on the act of the insured
that gave rise to his or her liability rather than the “immediate injury-
producing act.” The court held that, “Determining the number of
occurrences by looking to the underlying negligence of the insured
recognizes that the question of the extent of coverage rests upon the
contractual obligation of the insurer to the insured. Since the policy was
intended to insure [policyholders] for their liabilities, the occurrence
should be an event over which [policyholders] had some control.”
Likewise, the Texas Court of Appeals has ruled that an incident in
which the plaintiff separately shot and killed various family members
involved multiple occurrences based upon a claimed ambiguity in the
meaning of occurrence. State Farm Lloyds, Inc. v. Williams, 916 S.W.
2nd 781 ( Tex. App. - Dallas, 1997) .
Finally, some courts have focused on the specific nature of the
shooting injuries. For instance, the Alaska Supreme Court ruled in
USAA v. Neary, 307 P.3d 907 (Ala. 2013)  that an incident in which a
bullet accidentally fired by insured’s teenage son from his father’s gunthat passed through the body  of one friend, fatally wounding him, and
then lodged in the spine of another friend resulted from a single
occurrence. In rejecting a trial court’s determination that the plaintiffs
were entitled to three separate occurrence limits under the personal
liability provisions of the USAA homeowner’s policy, the court ruled
that the occurrence limit of liability applied “regardless of the number
of insureds, claims made or persons injured” and that the trial court had
therefore erred in multiplying the available limits by the number of
insureds under the policy. Further, the court refused to find that these
claims involved multiple occurrences based on the insureds’ respective
acts of negligence. The Supreme Court ruled that “There may have been
multiple acts of negligence, but it was a single gunshot that caused the
plaintiff’s damages. . . .” The court rejected the plaintiff’s argument that
it should adopt an “effects” test that would result in six separate
occurrences.
Products Liability Claims
Defendants in products liability cases typically are removed in time
and space from the event that physically causes the plaintiff’s injuries.
As a result, courts considering the number of occurrences for products
claims have come to different conclusions on the identity of the event
that is the cause of the insured’s liabilities. Conversely, the rules that
courts have adopted for auto accidents, premises exposure cases, and
more common forms of tort liability are not necessarily a reliable basis
for predicting the outcome of products-based occurrences disputes.
Single versus Multiple Occurrences
As a general rule, courts are more likely to find a single occurrence
when a claim arises out of a defectively designed product or an inherent
characteristic that is not affected by factors beyond the insured’s
control. By contrast, courts are more likely to find multiple occurrences
in products liability cases where the incidence of loss is significantly
affected by the manner in which the product is used or applied.This distinction is illustrated by a brace of decisions from the U.S.
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan involving Dow
Chemical’s liability insurance policies. In the first of these, the court
found multiple occurrences for Dow’s Sarabond claims. In the second,
all of the claims against the insured involving a defective pipeline were
found to involve a single occurrence.
In Dow Chemical Corp. v. Associated Indemnity Corp., 727 F.
Supp. 1524 (E.D. Mich. 1989) , Dow Chemical faced hundreds of suits
for property damage arising out of the installation of Sarabond as a
building mortar. The Sarabond caused internal steel to rust, which
eventually created cracks. The court ruled that each installation of
Sarabond in a separate building was a separate occurrence because the
manner of injury differed from site to site and depended to a large extent
on how the product had been installed.
By contrast, the same court ruled that a different set of mass
products liabilities were one occurrence in Associated Indemnity
Corporation v. Dow Chemical, 814 F. Supp. 613 (E.D. Mich. 1993) .
Defects in one of Dow’s resin products had required the replacement of
a vast natural gas pipeline network in Alberta, Canada. The court ruled
that all the claims arose from an inherently defective product and should
be grouped as one occurrence. In contrast to its rulings in the Sarabond
litigation, the court noted that Dow manufactured the product component
and was not directly involved in the installation or operation of the
pipeline. Unlike the Sarabond claims in which relatively few of the
products had actually failed, the replacement rate for the pipeline
product was 100 percent. The judge found, therefore, that the Dow resin
product was an “intrinsically harmful” product that had resulted in
property damage without regard to subsequent factors.
Where the insured is a product manufacturer and the immediate
cause of each plaintiff’s injury are circumstances that are beyond the
control of the insured (the product having previously been placed in the
stream of commerce and having traveled to the plaintiff through a
wholesaler, distributor, vendor and customer), courts are more likely to
determine the number of occurrences by looking to the last act of theinsured that forms the basis of its liability. In most cases, this will be the
insured’s transfer or delivery of the product to a third party.
In Maurice Pincoffs Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 447
F.2d 204 (5th Cir. 1971) , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
ruled in a Louisiana case that where the insured sold contaminated bird
seed to eight dealers, who in turn sold the seed to various individual
bird ow ners, it was the insured’s sales to the dealers that were the cause
of insured’s liability, not the number of individual claims by irate bird
owners.
This is particularly so in cases where the defect was caused by
manufacturing problems, not design defect, and is therefore limited to
particular batches of products. In a later Michigan case, the Sixth
Circuit ruled in Michigan Chemical Corp. v. American Home Assur.
Corp., 728 F.2d 374 (6th Cir. 1984)  that it was the insured’s negligence
in allowing the PBB to contaminate its cattle feed products that was the
occurrence. Since contaminants had been introduced into some
shipments and not others, the court ruled that shipments of contaminated
cattle feed by the manufacturer were each separate occurrences. See
also Home Ins. Co. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 528 F.2d 1388  (2d Cir.
1976) , remande d, 1977 Fire & Casualty Cases 9 (S.D.N.Y. 1977)
(damage to farm animals caused by the incorporation of contaminated
resin into insured’s feed supplement involved multiple occurrences
since the cause of insured’s liability was separate sales to third parties).
Courts have disagreed in these cases whether the insured’s defective
design or marketing of a product can be an occurrence. In London
Market Insurers v. Supe rior Court of Los Angeles County, 146 Cal.
App.4t h 648, 53 Cal. Rptr.3d 154 (2007) , the California Court of
Appeal ruled that the insured’s manufacture of asbestos products could
not be the occurrence since injuries did not occur until the products left
the insured’s control. In a related vein, a New York trial court ruled in
ExxonMobil Corp. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, 2007 WL
1615102 (N.Y. Supr. June 5, 2007)  that an insured could not aggregate
various products claims because “ExxonMobil’s manufacture of these
products is more easily characterized as conduct that was conscious andpurposeful. There was never any event that took place unexpectedly or
without design until the property damage occurred.”
The Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court ruled in
International Flavors and Fragrances, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of
America, No. 11-05-07 (App. Div. October 30, 2007)  that toxic tort
claims presented by workers in a microwave packaging plant who
suffered respiratory injuries as the result of exposure to a popc orn
butter flavoring additive were separate occurrences and therefore
required the insured to pay separate occurrence deductibles for each
claim. In keeping with the New York Court of Appeals’ decision in
General Electric, the appellate court ruled that these claims could not be
grouped as a single occurrence since they involved exposures that
occurred in different places over a period of  many years.
In American Red Cross v. The Travelers Ind. Co., 816 F.Supp. 755
(D.D.C. 1993) , the District Court ruled that claims against the Red
Cross for shipping HIV contaminated blood were not based on any
single negligent practice and should therefore be based on the number of
shipments of contaminated blood.
By contrast, a few products cases have found that because the defect
in the insured’s product existed when it left the insured’s premises, all
of the resulting claims share the same cause and should therefore be
treated as arising out of a single occurrence. See Champion
International Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co., 400 F.Supp. 978
(S.D.N.Y. 1975) , aff’d 546 F.2d 502 (2nd Cir. 1976)  (sale of the
insured’s defective panels to twenty-six boat manufacturers which
resulted in 1400 separate claims were all found to share one cause and
therefore constituted a single occurrence). Accord, Champion
International Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 701 F.Supp. 409
(S.D.N.Y. 1988) .
Some courts have ruled that measuring occurrences by the number of
shipments is unfair and arbitrary in cases where the number of
shipments was predetermined by a procurement contract or where the
shipments themselves were a routine, repetitive function. In such cases,courts have looked behind the physical act of shipment towards some
more encompassing cause.
In a coverage dispute arising out of the Agent Orange class action
the court ruled in Uniroyal, Inc. v. The Home Ins. Co., 707 F.Supp.
1368 (E.D.N.Y. 1988)  that looking solely to the number of shipments
would result in the amount of coverage being dependent on irrelevant
factors, such as the size of the trucks in which the insured’s product was
shipped. The district court noted that Uniroyal’s production volume was
preset by its contract with the Pentagon and that the fortuitous
circumstance that certain containers were smaller or larger than others
(thus determining the number of shipments required to transport the
stated product volume) would pointlessly skew these coverage
determinations. The district court concluded that Uniroyal’s delivery of
herbicide to the military was “the conceptual point at which Uniroyal
set its contaminated herbicides free upon the world to do their damage.”
Despite the fact that there were hundreds of deliveries by Uniroyal to
the military between October 6, 1966 and March 1, 1968, the court
determined that the deliveries were part of a pervasive policy
undertaken by the insured over several years and thus constituted only
one occurrence in each year that bodi ly injury had occurred.
In Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Lafarge Corp., 935 F.Supp. 675
(D. Md. 1996) , aff’d mem., 121 F.3d 699 (4th Cir. 1997) (unpublished)
(full text available at 1997 WL 532509) , LaFarge sought coverage for
$11 million that it had paid to resolve certain Lone Star Steel claims
arising out its sales of allegedly defective cement. The U.S. District
Court in Maryland had ruled that the loss should be apportioned
throughout the period of injury but was only subject to the $1 million
occurrence limit in the underlying primary policies, not the $2 million
aggregate as National Union had argued. The court rejected National
Union’s contention that each shipment of defective cement had
constituted a separate occurrence or that the insured had a separate
obligation to pay a new deductible for each batch or lot of cement,
ruling instead that LaFarge’s liability arose out of a single occurrence,
namely the “continuous, large scale manufacturing and sale” of itsproduct. These findings were affirmed by the Fourth Circuit in an
unpublished opi nion.
Applying Pennsylvania law, the Third Circuit has held that 76 of the
77 MTBE suits against a petroleum company resulted from the same
occurrence. In an unpublished opinion, the court ruled in Sunoc o, Inc. v.
Illinois National Ins. Co., No. 05-4922 (3rd Cir. January 31, 2007)  that
in keeping with its 2005 Treesdale opinion, all but one of the underlying
claims was based on the same claimed misconduct of the insured,
namely the manufacture of a hazardous product and failure to warn.
Accordingly, the court ruled that Illinois National was obligated to
defend these cases, since the insured had paid more than a single
$250,000 per occurrence SIR. However, the court held that one of the
cases was a different occurrence since the claims were premised on
Sunoco’s negligent maintenance of a gasoline station, rather than some
products liability theory. The Third Circuit also ruled that the claims
fell within an exception to the policy’s pollution exclusion because it
involved damage away from the insured’s property.
A federal district court ruled in Dragas  Manage ment Corp. v.
Hanov er Ins. Co., No. 2:10CV547 (E.D. Va. July 21, 2011) that a ruling
that a residential developer obtained against a drywall subcontractor
triggered coverage on the basis that each of the seventy-four homes
constituted a separate occurrence, rejecting Hanover’s argument that the
sole cause of the claims against the insured was its purchase of Chinese
Drywall product. Unlike cases where the insured’s liability solely arose
from its sale or distribution of a defective product, the court found
significant the fact that the insured was the party that installed the
drywall in each home. The district court held that it was the act of
installation that set the chain of events that culminated in damage to each
home.
Single Occurrence Products Cases
Examples of single occurrence products liability cases are:•    American M otorists Ins. Co. v. Trane Co., 544 F . Supp. 669
(W.D. Wis. 1982) , aff’d, 718 F .2d 842 ( 7th Cir. 1983) . All
damage at a particular plant was held to be one occurrence
because it flowed from the common failure of the insured’s heat
exchangers.
•    Bartholomew v. Insurance Co. of North America, 502 F . Supp.
246 ( D.R.I. 1980) , aff’d sub nom , 655 F .2d 27 ( 1st Cir. 1981) .
Damage to car wash customers’ vehicles resulted from the same
product defect and arose out of one occurrence.
•    Cargill, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 488 F . Supp. 49 ( D.
Minn. 1979) , aff’d, 621 F .2d 275 ( 8th Cir. 1980) . Multiple
sales of contaminated nutrient medium were held to constitute
one occurrence because all the ensuing claims were caused by a
change in the nutrient formula.
•    Carpenter Plastering C o. v. Puritan Ins. Co., No. 3-87-2435-
R, 1988 W L 156829 ( N.D. Tex. August 23, 1988) . Damage
from installations of asbestos board wall panels in buildings
involved exposure to the same conditions and was one
occurrence.
•    Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Devon International, Inc., No. 110-5930
(E.D. Pa. February 16, 2013) . Chinese drywall claims brought
against a Pennsylvania importer all originated from a common
source – the insured’s single purchase and shipment of defective
drywall from Shandong – and therefore are attributable to a
single occurrence.
•    Colonial Gas v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co., 823 F . Supp. 975 ( D.
Mass. 1993) . UFFI claims that were based on off-gassing from
the foam insulation that the utility had arranged to have installed
in homes constituted one occurrence. Done as a part of an
energy conservation program, the insured’s insulation program
was a single occurrence from which the injuries arose.•    Household Manuf. Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., No. 85- C-
8519, 1987 U .S. Dist. LEXIS 10837, ( N.D. Ill. February 10,
1987) . Claims based upon the same defect in plumbing all arose
out of one occurrence.
•    National Union Fire Co. v. Puget Plastics Corp., 649 F .
Supp.2d 613 ( S.D. Tex. 2009) . Defective plastic water
chambers incorporated into ove r 800 w ater heaters constituted
a single occurrence, as the cause of the multiple failures was the
single manufacturing defect.
•    Sting Se curity, Inc. v. First Mercury Syndicate, Inc., 791 F .
Supp. 555 ( D. Md. 1992) . Separate problems that arose out of a
defect in a security system were one occurrence.
•    Westchester Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v. Maverick Tube Corp.,
No. H-07-540 ( S.D. Tex. June 28, 2010) . Claims against an oil-
field pipe manufacturer that sold 1,306 pi eces of pipe to a
distributor, who in turn sold the pipe to a drilling company, who
used the pipe in four different gas wells where the pipe failed
due to a manufacturing defect were subject only to a single
$350,000 pe r occurrence self-insured retention.
Multiple Occurrence Products Cases
Examples of multiple occurrence products liability cases
are:
•    Affiliated FM Ins. Co. v. Beatrice Foods  Co., 1986 U .S. Dist.
LEXIS 24265 ( N.D. Ill. June 16, 1986) . The insured’s sales of a
defective coating product to pool  manufacturers constituted
separate occurrences.
•    Bausch & Lomb, Inc. v. Lexington Ins. Co., 2009 U .S. Dist.
LEXIS 120304 ( W.D.N.Y. December 28, 2009) . Thousands of
individual lawsuits brought against the manufacturer of acontact lens cleaning solution were held to involve separate
occurrences.
•    Dow Corning v. Continental Cas. Co., No. 200143 ( Mich.
App. O ctober 12, 1999)  (unpublished). Suits against silicone-
filled breast implant manufacturer arose from multiple
occurrences.
•    Dragas  Manage ment Corp. v. Hanov er Ins. Co., No.
2:10CV547 ( E.D. Va. July 21, 201 1). Each of the homes into
which insured installed defective dry wall product deemed a
separate occurrence.
•    Honeycomb Systems, Inc. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 567 F . Supp.
1400 ( D. Me. 1983) . When machinery broke dow n a few years
after the original incident because of a different problem, the
claims involved two occurrences.
Toxic Tort Litigation
Since the 1970s , insurers have been confronted by policyholder
demands for coverage for mass litigation by individuals and property
owners who allege injury from the harmful consequences of the
insured’s products, notably asbestos-containing materials, prosthetic
devices, and pharmaceutical products. Mass tort litigation also has
emerged from occupational exposures, such as hearing loss.
Courts have developed three classifications for measuring the
number of occurrences for toxic tort liabilities: 1) the marketing of the
product (one occurrence), 2) the location or particular circumstances to
which groups of plaintiffs were exposed (dozens of occurrences), or 3)
the specific exposure of each plaintiff (countless occurrences).
Of these three, the most common has been the latter. A large number
of courts have recently found that each claimant is a separate occurrence
on the theory that the specific etiology of the claimant’s asbestosis,
mesothelioma, silicosis, or other disease developed through a slightlydifferent process than other claimants’ diseases. Even when the
insured’s coverage profile makes a single occurrence the best means of
maximizing coverage, these courts have for the most part refused to look
at intermediate unifying factors, such as exposure to common products
during particular periods of time or at particular locations, as the cause
of the insured’s liabilities. Viewed in this way, cause becomes
synonymous with effect.
The Illinois Supreme Court ruled in Nicor, Inc. v. Aegis, 860 N .E.2d
280 (Ill. 2006)  that class action claims against a gas utility for personal
injury and property damage resulting from the negligent removal of
meter devices that contained mercury did not all result from a single
cause so as to only require the insured to pay a single occurrence
deductible. Rather, the court ruled that the mercury contamination in the
195 homes for which it submitted claims under the policies that it
purchased from London Insurers between 1961 and 1978 required the
insured to pay additional occurrence deductibles for each triggered
year. After a lengthy and detailed review of Illinois cases over the past
two decades in which courts had applied the cause theory to the issue of
occurrences, the Supreme Court held that the appellate court had
correctly concluded that there was no single underlying cause to these
claims as each asserted loss was the result of a separate and intervening
human act in contrast to claims against a product manufacturer where the
damages are all attributable to the manufacturer’s sale of a defective
product or a fraudulent sales scheme. The court adopted with favor the
cause approach that the appellate court had pioneered in 1988  in the
Mason case. Despite Nicor’s argument that its liability was not tied to
any individual spill but rather reflected the overall cost of investigating
and remediating the spills in response to the legal actions filed against
it, the Supreme Court held that the operative “happening” “event” or
“accident” was not the lawsuit brought against the utility but rather the
underlying injuries. Likewise, the court rejected the insured’s contention
that these claims should be viewed as a single occurrence, since they all
arose out of a uniform legal proceeding. The court ruled that the
consolidation of individual claims as a single action was a question of
litigation efficiency and had no bearing on the limits of coverage.
Likewise, the court rejected Nicor’s argument that interpreting theseclaims as involving 195 separate occurrences would somehow deny it
the benefit of its bargain, the court declined the invitation of certain
amici to adopt a rule that would preclude the finding of a single
occurrence in the absence of a unifying directive in the policy language.
One might well wonder why the occurrences issue arises in the
context of products liability claims, whether for toxic torts or otherwise,
since most general liability policies contain aggregate protection for
claims within the products hazard. Part of the reason is that the
aggregate limit may be higher than the per occurrence limit. Also, courts
sometimes have refused to give effect to this aggregate protection in
toxic tort cases. For instance, negligence claims involving the typing of
blood were held to involve services and not products in American Red
Cross v. The Travelers Ind. Co., 816 F. Supp. 755 (D.D.C. 1993) ,
which involved the mishandling of HIV-contaminated blood.
Alternatively, some courts have ruled that injurious exposures to
asbestos fibers that occur while the insured’s asbestos-containing
product is being installed are outside the scope of the products hazard
because the product was still under the insured’s control. Examples of
this reasoning are found in Frontier Insulation Contractors, Inc. v.
Merchants Mutual Ins. Co., 690 N.E. 2d 866 (N.Y. 1997)  and
Commercial Union Ins. Co. v. Porter Hayden Co., 698 A .2d 1 167 ( Md.
App. 1997) , writ denied (Md. December 10, 1997) . Of course, current
editions of standard CGL policies do include general aggregates for
nonproducts claims, but these often are higher than the products-
completed ope rations aggregate.
Asbestos Claims
Without surprise, the greatest number of toxic tort occurrences cases
involves asbestos claims. Many courts have ruled that each individual
asbestos claimant is a new occurrence despite arguments that the cause
of the insured’s liability was the decision to market asbestos products.
An exception to this one claimant/one occurrence rule are cases in
which policies contain high self-insured retentions or deductibles,retrospectively-rated premiums, or other provisions that would limit the
insured’s recovery if more than one occurrence were found. This line of
reasoning can be seen in Colt Indus tries, Inc. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co.,
1989 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14496 (E.D. Pa. December 5, 1989) , which
highlights high per occurrence deductibles, and Morton-Thiokol, Inc. v.
Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 666 N.E.2d 1163 (Sept. 29, 1995) , which
involves a retrospectively rated premium. In such cases, courts have
tended to focus on the insured’s decision to market a particular product
as the cause of all ensuing liabilities involving that product.
Another notable exception was the Third Circuit’s ruling in Liberty
Mutual Ins. Co. v. Treesdale, Inc., 418 F.3d 330 (3rd Cir. 2005).
Treesdale manufactured and sold a product known as Soffelex that
contained asbestos and as a result became the subject of thousands of
asbestos bodily injury claims. Liberty Mutual provided a defense to
these actions under various policies that it issued between 1975 and
1985 that contained policy limits of $500,000. After exhausting these
policies, Liberty agreed to pay a single $5 million umbrella limit
notwithstanding the fact that it had issued excess policies to Treesdale
between 1975 and 1983. As these policies contained a non-cumulation
clause, however, Liberty Mutual contended that the most that it owed
was the largest per occurrence limit in the excess layer. A federal
district court in the Western District of Pennsylvania agreed. On appeal,
the Third Circuit ruled on August 15, 2005 that these claims all involve
a single occurrence because the cause of all the underlying claims was
the insured’s manufacture and sale of products containing asbestos. The
court relied in large part on its 1982 opinion in Appalachian in which it
noted that, “The fact that there are injuries of different magnitudes that
occur at different times did not alter the conclusion that there was a
similar occurrence as long as they all shared one proximate cause.” The
court took note of the fact that language in the underlying policies
differentiated between persons, claims and occurrences. Additionally, it
rejected the insured’s various arguments as to why Appalachian was no
longer good law in Pennsylvania as well as the insured’s argument that
it should follow alternative sources of authority, such as the Connecticut
Supreme Court’s analysis in Metropolitan, in which the court had ruled
that each individual claimant is a new occurrence.Similarly, in a case applying Illinois law, the New Jersey Supreme
Court in In The Matter of The Liquidation of Integrity Ins. Co., 214
N.J. 51, 67 A.3d 587 (2013)  ruled that, as a sophisticated insured,
Celotex should have realized that its excess layers of coverage were
going to be penetrated by its asbestos liabilities and should have given
notice to its post-1982 insurers, including Integrity. Although the claims
set forth in the Trust’s 2009 Proof of Claim had not been extant at the
time of the dispositive rulings in the Florida coverage litigation, the
court ruled that these later claims were subject to the same outcome that
they all arose out of the same occurrence, which it defined under Illinois
law as “Celotex’s continued manufacture and distribution of asbestos-
containing products.”
Asbestos Cases Finding One Occurrence. The earlier, but no
longer majority view was that the cause of asbestos liability was the
insured’s decision to market asbestos products. This is illustrated in a
number of cases, including:
•    Air & Liquid Systems and A mpco Pittsburgh C orp. v. Allianz
Ins., et al., No. 11-427 ( W.D. Pa. September 30, 2013) .
•    Colt Indus tries, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co., 1989 U .S. Dist.
LEXIS 14496 ( E.D. Pa. December 5, 1989) . The insured’s
manufacture of asbestos products was a single ongoing
occurrence.
•    Greene Tweed & Co., Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity,
No. 03- 3637 ( E.D. Pa. April 21, 2006) .
•    International Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v. Certain Underwriters
at Lloyd’s, 868 F . Supp. 917 ( S.D. Ohio 1994) . The liability
insurer acted reasonably in settling an asbestos coverage
dispute on a single occurrence basis, focusing on the insured’s
decision to manufacture and market asbestos products.
•    In the Matter of The Liquidation of  Integrity Ins. Co., 214 N .J.
51, 67 A .3d 587 ( 2013)  (applying Illinois law).•    Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v. Treesdale, Inc., 418 F .3d 330 ( 3rd
Cir. 2005)  (applying Pennsylvania law).
•    Morton-Thiokol, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co., 666 N .E.2d
1163 ( Sept. 29, 1995) . These asbestos personal injury suits
against the insured arose out of its corporate decision to
manufacture brake components containing asbestos. That
decision is the single occurrence that caused all the claims.
•    Owens Illinois, Inc. v. United Insurance Co., 625A .2d 1 ( N.J.
App. 1993)  rev’d on ot her grounds , 138 N .J. 437, 650 A .2d
974 ( N.J. 1994) . Policy provisions treating “a series of
interrelated acts” as one occurrence mandate finding the
insured’s marketing of asbestos products was the sole
occurrence for resulting liabilities.
•    Owens Illinois, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co., 597 F . Supp.
1515 ( D.D.C. 1984) . The decision to manufacture asbestos
products was the single cause of all personal injury claims.
•    Truck Ins. Exchange  v. Kaiser Cement & Gypsum Corp., Los
Angeles No. BC249550 ( Cal. Super. January 10, 2006) .
Occurrence interpretation focuses on conduct of manufacturer.
•    U.S. G ypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co., 643 N .E.2d 1226 ( Ill.
App. 1994) . Rejecting the trial court’s determination that each
discovery of damage by a building owner was a separate
occurrence requiring the payment of a separate policy
deductible by USG, the Appellate Court ruled that these claims
were also caused by the “continuing process of the manufacture
and sale of asbestos containing products” by the insured and
should therefore be treated as involving one occurrence.
Even these “failure to warn” or “decision to manufacture” cases
have found separate occurrences when the claims against the
manufacturer arise out of different product lines. For instance, in
Westinghous e Electric Corp. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., Union No. L-
069351- 97 (N.J. Super. August 7, 1998) , a New Jersey trial courtdeclared that under Pennsylvania law the various suits involving
asbestos, PCB-containing products, and welding rod fumes should be
treated as involving three separate occurrences because there was a
separate decision to manufacture and sell each product.
Asbestos Cases Finding Multiple Occurrences. More recent cases
have tended to take a more expansive view and have ruled that each
individual claimant is a new occurrence.
An early but influential ruling in this respect was the Phase IV
decision in Asbestos Insurance Coverage Cases, Judicial Counc il
Coordination Proceeding No. 1072 (Cal. Super. August 29, 1988) ,
aff’d on other grounds , 52 Cal. Rptr.2d 690 (Cal. App. 1996) . The
Superior Court agreed with Armstrong and other asbestos manufacturers
that had argued that each asbestos bodily injury claimant was a separate
accident or occurrence. Various insurers had contended that the number
of policy limits should be aggregated by factors that might be common
to the exposures suffered by groups of claimants, such as the type of
product or location of exposure.
The Coordinated Asbestos analysis was largely adopted by the
California Court of Appeal in London Market Insurers v. Supe rior
Court of Los Angeles County, 146 Cal. App.4th 648, 53 Cal. Rptr.3d
154 (2007). In declaring that a trial court erred in holding that it was a
cement manufacturer’s production and distribution of products
containing asbestos that was the single occurrence giving rise to its
liabilities, the Second District rejected any remote cause analysis of this
sort, declaring that the plain language of the various policies at issue,
coupled with their drafting history precluded any such finding as a
matter of law. In keeping with the Coordinated Asbestos and Fina
opinions, the court concluded that the failure to protect claimants from
asbestos was not a condition. Rather, it concluded that the conditions at
issue were the asbestos fibers released from Kaiser’s product to which
the underlying claimants were exposed. The court also refused to find
that these claims fell within the products hazard since the manufacture
or distribution occurred prior to the relinquishment of the product by the
insured. Nor did they fall within the policies deemer clause. Finally,turning to California precedents in non-toxic tort cases, the Court of
Appeal refused to find that any of the cited cases suggest that the number
of occurrences should be determined by reference to the conduct of the
insured which gives rise to liability or any other remote cause. While
therefore rejecting the primary insurer’s contention that these claims
involved a single occurrence, the Court of Appeal further found that
separate occurrences were not subject to any applicable policy
aggregate. First, the court refused to find that these claims involved
injuries arising out of a lot of goods  or products under certain earlier
policies, observing that there was no evidence that all of the asbestos
claims derived from a single lot of the insured’s products. The court
declined to limit this language to claims involving design defects,
declaring that it had equal applicability to non-conforming products.
The court rejected the contrary analysis adopted by the Appellate Court
in Diamond Sham rock in 1992. The court declined to give effect to
language in the policies issued after 1974 aggregating losses involving
“substantially the same general conditions existing at or emanating from
each premises location.” In view of the fact that the products at issue
were manufactured at ten different facilities at various times, the Court
of Appeal held that the claims could not have all emanated from one
premises location. However, the court refused to find that this “same
general conditions” language applied only to premises coverage, not
products liability claims. The case was therefore remanded for the
development of a more precise factual record as to whether the facts of
each claim would permit the number of occurrences and the insurer’s
obligations to be limited by separate claims involving individual lots or
individual premise locations.
In Babcock and Wilcox Co. v. Arkwright-Boston Manufacturing
Mutual Ins. Co., 53 F.3d 762 (6th Cir. 1995) , the district court in Ohio
ruled that each claimant’s exposure to asbestos materials was a separate
event for determining the number of occurrences. On appeal, the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit agreed.
The Connecticut Supreme Court ruled in Metropolitan Life Ins.
Co. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 255 Conn. 295, 765 A.2d 891 (2001)  that
the cause of the underlying claimants’ asbestos injuries was notMetropolitan’s alleged failure to warn but rather each claimant’s
exposure to asbestos fibers. Metropolitan was sued by thousands of
asbestos claimants who alleged that it had concealed knowledge with
respect to asbestos risks that it had obtained as a consequence of
providing health care insurance to various asbestos manufacturers and
distributors. In particular, the evidence was that Metropolitan had
engaged in medical research concerning asbestos exposures beginning
in the 1930’ s under the direction of Dr. Anthony Lanza, Metropolitan’s
medical directors. Metropolitan sought coverage for these claims under
primary and excess policies issued to it between 1976 and 1986 by
Aetna (Travelers). The excess policies were not triggered until such
time as Metropolitan had paid $25 million per occurrence. In order to
maximize the benefits of this coverage, therefore, Metropolitan argued
that all of the underlying claims could be aggregated as a single
occurrence since all asserted that Metropolitan was liable for the same
conduct (i.e.. its failure to warn the plaintiffs of what it had learned
about the dangers of asbestos). Home, Travelers, and other excess
carriers contended, however, that whether viewed under the law of
Connecticut or New York, the cause of each plaintiff’s injury was their
exposure to asbestos and that each claimant must be therefore treated as
a separate occurrence. The Superior Court agreed with the insurers,
stating that “The event of unfortunate character which must occur close
in time with no intervening agent must be...each claimant’s separate
exposure to asbestos.” The court declined to alter this analysis merely
because excess insurance existed, finding that “this court is not
persuaded as a matter of pure social policy that catastrophic insurance
was ever meant to cover losses for a collection of underlying lawsuits
of dubious merit, no matter how great in number, which are being settled
individually for nuisance values.”
On appeal, the Connecticut Supreme Court was asked to consider
whether an omission, that is to say the insured’s failure to warn, might
constitute a cause of the plaintiff’s injuries. The court ruled that the
policy terms could not plausibly be read to combine “hundreds of
thousands of exposures that occurred under different circumstances
throughout the country over a period of sixty years into one occurrence.”
Adopting the New York event test, the Supreme Court ruled that theexposures to asbestos constitute several occurrences in view of the fact
that they were separated in time, place and circumstances. Rather, the
court looked to the “immediate event that caused the claimants’
injuries” and therefore ruled that the number of occurrences must be
determined by each claimant’s individual exposure to asbestos.
In keeping with Metropolitan, a state trial court in Connecticut
rejected Hartford’s contention that the $1.15 billion that it paid to
Western McArthur to resolve coverage issues involving 17,000
underlying asbestos suits could be ceded to London reinsurers as arising
out of a single accident, happening or occurrence. In Hartford Accident
& Indemnity Co. v. Ace American Reinsurance Co., CV03-017822
(Conn. Super. December 13, 2005) , appe al pending (Conn. 2007) , the
court granted summary judgment to Hartford’s reinsurers holding that
they had established beyond any question of fact that the underlying
claims failed to exhaust the $25 million per occurrence retentions. The
court rejected Hartford’s efforts to distinguish the Connecticut Supreme
Court’s multiple occurrences holding in Metropolitan. Under the
circumstances, the superior court refused to find that the underlying
claims shared a common cause. The court also rejected Hartford’s
contention that reinsurers were bound to follow its fortune and could
only avoid a payment obligation by establishing that Hartford had acted
unreasonably or in bad faith in construing these treaties to allow
aggregation, holding instead that the “follow the fortunes” doctrine
could not be relied on to trump terms in the underlying policies or to
bind a reinsurer to indemnify a cedent whenever it paid a claim
regardless of the contractual language defining the loss in the underlying
policies.
In Flintkote Co. v. General Accident Assurance Co. of Canada , No.
C04-01827 (N. D. Cal. January 3, 2006) , the court held that in the
context of asbestos claims an occurrence is “exposure to asbestos that
causes and immediately precedes an injury giving rise to liability under
the policy.” In rejecting the defendant’s argument that the district court
should use an equitable approach that might focus on different events
depending on discovery such as the insured’s decision to mine and sell
asbestos or the number of plants receiving the insured’s asbestos, thecourt ruled that equity was not the relevant test and that, applying the
terms of the policy the event giving rise to liability that immediately
precedes the asbestos-related injury is plainly the exposure to asbestos
fibers.
In the most recent opinion to analyze these issues, the California
Court of Appeal ruled in London Market Insurers v. Superior Court,
146 Cal. App. 4th 648; 53 Cal. Rptr. 3d 154 (2007)  that a trial court
erred in holding that it was a cement manufacturer’s manufacture and
distribution of products containing asbestos that was the single
occurrence giving rise to its liabilities. In rejecting any remote cause
analysis of this sort, the Second District declared that the plain language
of the various policies at issue, coupled with their drafting history
precluded any such finding as a matter of law. While refusing to find
that each individual claim was a separate occurrence, the Court of
Appeal remanded the case to the Superior Court for the development of
a more precise factual record as to whether the real parties in interest
could establish that certain of the claims might be aggregated as arising
out of a particular lot or an individual premises location.
Likewise, the New York Court of Appeals has ruled that each
individual worker who suffered bodily injury as a consequence of
exposure to asbestos-containing products constitutes a separate
occurrence for purposes of determining the limits of coverage available
to satisfy the third-party claims. The effect of the court’s ruling in the
matter of Appalachian Ins. Co. v. General Electric Co., 2007 NY Slip
Op 1334, 8 N.Y. 3d 162, 831 N.Y.S.2d 742, 863 N.E. 2d 994 will be to
largely preclude General Electric from obtaining any excess coverage
for these asbestos claims owing to the fact that its primary liability
insurance (which was largely self-insured), only contained per
occurrence limits and did not include any aggregate liability limit. The
excess insurers had disputed efforts by GE and Emlico to characterize
its asbestos liabilities on a more limited basis which, while it varied
over time, ultimately focused on the number of product lines
manufactured by GE that were resulting in asbestos claims. Whereas GE
argued that the cause of its liabilities was its failure to give warnings
concerning the presence of asbestos in its turbines, the Court of Appealsagreeing with the trial court and the Appellate Division ruled that in
keeping with cases such as A. Johns on and Wesolowski, claims
occurring in different parts of the country in different decades affecting
different individuals could not all be aggregated as a single occurrence.
The Court of Appeals held that factors to consider in assessing whether
there were one or several occurrences included “whether there is a
close temporal and spatial relationship between the incidents giving
rise to injury or loss, and whether the incidents could be viewed as part
of the same causal continuum, without intervening agents or factors.”
Even though A. Johns on had construed the meaning of an accident
policy, the Court of Appeals held that the same analysis was true with
respect to these occurrence policies since there was no indication that
the industry’s transition from accident to occurrence-based coverage
was intended to have any impact on the limits of coverage. Since the
triggering event for purposes of coverage was each individual
claimant’s exposure to asbestos and in view of the fact that these
injurious exposures occurred in widely different locations and times,
the court ruled that there were unquestionably multiple occurrences.
This one claim/one occurrence analysis is not limited to bodily
injury claims. In Stonewall Ins. Co. v. Asbestos Claims Manage ment
Corp., 73 F.3d 1178 (2nd Cir. 1995) , National Gypsum sought coverage
for hundreds of property claims filed against it that had arisen out of the
installation of its asbestos-containing building products. The policies at
issue contained a substantial per occurrence deductible. In light of the
effect that this deductible would have had on its available insurance
coverage if each claim were treated as a separate occurrence, National
Gypsum contended that the claims all arose from its manufacture and
sale of asbestos-containing products—a single occurrence. The Second
Circuit rejected this argument. Applying New York’s unfortunate event
cause analysis, the court declared that the insurable occurrence was not
the manufacturer’s general decision to manufacture wallboard
containing asbestos but rather each installation of wallboards.
Accordingly, the court declared that each building constituted a separate
occurrence. Accord, Maryland Cas. Co. v. W.R. Grace and Co., 128
F.3d 794 ( 2nd Cir. 1997) .A divided panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
affirmed a New York district court’s determination that a per occurrence
deductible be applied separately to each asbestos bodily injury claim
against a bankrupt shipping company. In In Re Prudential Lines, Inc.,
158 F.3d 65 (2nd Cir. 1998) , the court noted that New York law would,
in any event, likely have resulted in each claim being treated as a
separate occurrence. The court quoted with favor decisions from other
jurisdictions that had declared that, because the medical history and
process of diseases for each asbestos claimant was unique, each
exposure must be viewed as a separate occurrence. A dissenting judge,
however, warned that the logical outcome of this analysis would require
a finding that each subsequent exposure suffered by a claimant also
would be a separate occurrence. The court pointed out that the
occurrence in such cases is not the same as the claimed injury because
one is the cause and the other, the effect.
On a certified question from the Seventh Circuit, the Wisconsin
Supreme Court ruled in Plastics Engineering Co. v. Liberty Mut. Ins.
Co., 759 N.W.2d 613 (Wis. 2009) , that under a cause test, each
individual asbestos claimant should be treated as a separate occurrence,
rejecting an insurer’s argument that it was the insured manufacturer’s
failure to warn that was the common cause.
In contrast to this each claimant/each occurrence approach, a few
courts have adopted an intermediate approach that focuses on
occupational exposures in which multiple claimants are injured as the
result of exposures to toxic materials in the same time and place.
For instance, a federal district court ruled in Fina, Inc. v. Travelers
Ind. C o., 184 F.Supp.2d 547 (N.D. Tex. 2002)  that exposure to asbestos
at three separate locations all owned by the defendant constituted three
separate occurrences. Travelers had argued that the claims all arose out
of a single occurrence, namely the insured’s failure to protect its
employees, which Travelers likened to the “continuous or repeated
exposure to conditions” language in its policy.
In keeping with this approach, another federal district court ruled in
LSG Technologies, Inc. v. U.S. Fire Ins. Co., No. 2:07-CV-399 (E.D.Tex. September 2, 2010)  that there was no single continuous cause that
had resulted in all of the underlying injuries although claimants exposed
to asbestos-containing gaskets at the same time and location could be
aggregated together since they were “exposed to substantially the same
general condition.” The court adopted an intermediate approach,
however, holding that the cause analysis should focus on the events
giving rise to the plaintiffs’ injuries, not the injuries themselves and that
individual claimants could be grouped together as one occurrence if
they were all exposed to asbestos-containing gaskets at the same time
and location so as to have been exposed to “substantially the same
general conditions.”
Hearing Loss Claims. In recent years, railroads have been sued in
thousands of FELA cases for alleged hearing loss due to employees’
exposure to allegedly unsafe work conditions around the country. Many
of these cases involve policyholders with large self-insured retentions
who therefore contend that their failure to implement proper protective
measures was the single cause of their liabilities. Conversely, insurers
have tended to argue that the specific circumstances of the claimants’
injuries require a finding of multiple occurrences, or, at a minimum, that
only cases involving hearing loss arising out of exposures to
substantially similar conditions may be grouped. This includes
arguments for grouping employees who worked at a particular site at the
same time.
While sharing certain common characteristics with products
liability suits, hearing loss claims are a unique area of occurrences case
law. As a preliminary matter, they do not arise out of the sale or
distribution of a product. Railroads do not manufacture or sell noise. In
addition, such claims are influenced by the statutory elements of FELA
as well as the fact that many of the policies contain employer’s liability
insurance features, such as cessation from work clauses and a separate
aggregate limit for occupational disease.
Courts have frequently ruled that gradually developed injuries by
railroad workers fall within this meaning of occupational disease and
therefore are subject to this aggregate limit. Cases that discuss theseissues include Chesapeake & Ohio Ry. Co. v. Certain Underwriters at
Lloyd’s, 716 F. Supp. 27 (D.D.C. 1989) , rev’d on other grounds , 910
F.2d 960 (D.C. Cir. 1990)  (asbestos claims) and Norfolk & Western
Railway Co. v. Accident & Cas. Ins. Co. of Winterthur, 41 F.3d 928,
931 (4th Cir. 1994)  aff’d in part, rev’d in part, 41 F.3d 982 (4th Cir.
1994)  (NIHL claims).
In CSX Transportation, Inc. v. Continental Ins. Co., 680 A .2d 1082
(Md. 1996) , a railroad conglomerate sought coverage from its liability
insurers for thousands of hearing loss claims. Each of the 246 policies
at issue contained a self-insured retention that ranged from $100,000 to
$3 million. The Maryland trial court rejected the insured’s contention
that there were at most two occurrences: the claimant’s exposure to
hazardous noise and the failure of the railroad’s mandated system-wide
hearing protection that would have prevented these exposures. The jury
was instructed that the purpose of this self-insurance was to protect
against high frequency, low severity losses, without incurring the
additional premium expense that the policyholder would otherwise
incur. The jury concluded that there were a minimum of 20,235 separate
occurrences and found that CSX had failed to prove that the
occupational hearing losses at issue were accidents or a series of
accidents under the policies. Based upon this verdict, the court entered
a judgment in favor of the insurers.
On appeal, the Maryland Court of Appeals declared that the cause
instruction to the jury had appropriately stated the test for determining
the number of occurrences. Addressing the claims as a whole, the court
held that multiple injuries could only be aggregated if the exposure of
the claimants occurred at the same place or had been caused by the
same source. Otherwise, the court held that there was no commonality
between the claims or between the injuries. Conversely, the causes
propos ed by CSX were too br oad in general to be applied.
A different view was adopted by the Kansas Supreme Court in
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad Co. v. Stonewall Ins. Co., 71
P.3d 1093 (Kan. 2003) . The lower court ruled that noise induced
hearing loss claims could be aggregated because they shared a singlecause, namely the insured’s failure to implement a program to protect its
employees from hearing loss. On appeal, the Kansa Supreme Court
began with the issue of whether the 3,800 individual NIHL claims
should be treated as a single occurrence or not. The railroad had argued
that the event was “its negligent failure to timely implement an effective
hearing conservation program that would have protected its workers
from the excessive noise inherent in railroad operations.” The insurers
argued, on the other hand, that the event was the exposure to the
injurious noise and because each worker had a unique work history, the
many exposures to different noises at different times and places
required a finding of multiple occurrences. As none of these
occurrences exceeded Santa Fe’s self-insured retentions, the excess
insurers argued that they should be freed from any contractual obligation
for these claims. After a lengthy discussion of Kansas precedents as
well as out-of-state cases such as CSX and Norfolk & Western, the
Supreme Court concluded with minimal analysis that there was support
for the trial court’s “single occurrence” decision in the policy language
as well as the law of either Kansas or Illinois. To a large extent, the
Kansas Supreme Court followed the analysis of the Appellate Court of
Illinois in Missouri Pacific, particularly as regards the issue of self-
insured retentions, number of occurrences, horizontal exhaustion and
allocation.
Lead Paint Claims. Although some courts have held that children’s’
exposure to lead in a single insured apartment or residence involves
exposure to similar conditions, others have found that the individualized
circumstance of each plaintiff’s injury is a new occurrence.
The Maryland Court of Special Appeals has ruled that the exposure
of various children to lead paint in a single apartment triggered separate
occurrence limits in each of the years in which bodily injury occurred.
In Maryland Casualty Co. v. Hanson, 902 A.2d 152 (Md. App. 2006) ,
the court rejected the insurer’s argument that the children’s injuries all
arose out of the same cause or that coverage should be limited to the
year in which injuries initially arose. In a lengthy opinion, the court
declared that in the absence of a non-cumulation clause or limiting
language of the sort construed by the New York Court of Appeals inHiraldo, Maryland “trigger of coverage” case law and the Maryland
Court of Appeals’ recent ruling in Riley made clear that successive
limits of coverage could be stacked for continuing injury cases and that
the insured’s recovery was not limited to a single policy year. Unlike
the court’s ruling in CSX, the Court of Special Appeals declared that the
number of occurrences was determined by reference to the continuous
injury trigger without regard to a cause analysis.
The First Department of the Appellate Division of the New York
Supreme Court ruled in Ramirez v. Allstate Ins. Co., 2006 NY Slip Op
01356 (N.Y. App. February 23, 2006) , that separate claims brought by
two infant children who were exposed to lead dust inside the insured’s
apartment building were subject to the same occurrence limit as
presenting claims for bodily injury “resulting from continuous or
repeated exposure to the same general conditions.”
Other Job Site Exposures. Efforts to aggregate on the basis of the
number of job sites have been rejected by state and federal courts in
Louisiana in a series of asbestos and silicosis cases. See e.g., Ducre v.
Mine Safety Appliances Co., 645 F. Supp. 708 (E.D. La. 1986) , aff’d,
833 F.2d 588 (5th Cir. 1987) (silicosis claims); Cole v. Celotex, 588 S o.
2d 376 (La. App. 1991) , aff’d, 599 So. 2d 1058 (La. 1992) (asbestos)
and Houston v. Avondal e Shipyards, Inc., 506 So. 2d 149 (La. App.
1987) , writ denied, 512 S o. 2d 460 ( La. 1987)  (silicosis).
In Exxon Corp. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 1996 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 17278 (E.D. La. November 15, 1996) , aff’d mem., 129 F .3d 781
(5th Cir. 1997) , several workmen became ill after handling a cargo of
soil and petroleum residues that apparently contained trace substances
of hazardous materials. St. Paul contended that all of the workers
became ill as the result of their exposure over the course of a few days
to the contaminated cargo. However, the court ruled that the claimants’
exposures, which had occurred at different stages of the cargo’s journey
over the course of several days, could not be said to all involve the
consequences of a single, identifiable event. This was particularly true
because the marine policy involved did not contain CGL language thatwould have aggregated all “continuous or repeated exposure to
substantially the same general conditions.”
Toxic Tort Claims against Contractors. An effort to trigger
multiple occurrence limits based upon separate spraying incidents was
rejected by the Texas Court of Appeals in Foust v. Range r Ins. Co., 975
S.W.2d 329 (Tex. App. 1988) . Foust was a cotton farmer whose crop
was damaged as a consequence of herbicides that drifted onto his
property while being sprayed by the insured crop duster. The crop
dusting was performed over the course of three hours on May 14, 1994.
During this period, the wind direction changed, and temperature changes
may have affected how the herbicides drifted. The insured also had to
make numerous passes over the target area and landed to refuel on
several occasions. The plaintiffs contended that each time the plane
landed, the previously released herbicide dissipated so that each new
spraying created a new cloud that was a separate occurrence.
The Ranger policy had limits of $100,000 per occurrence and
$200,000 in the aggregate. The policy stated that “. . .all bodily injury
or property damage resulting from the same general conditions will be
considered to be caused by one occurrence.” Although Ranger agreed to
provide a defense, it balked when asked to contribute more than
$100,000 toward the settlement. The underlying plaintiffs sought a
declaration that they were entitled to $200,000 because more than one
occurrence had taken place. The San Antonio trial court entered
summary judgment for Ranger, declaring that the insured’s application
of herbicide on that date constituted a single occurrence.
This finding was affirmed by the Texas Court of Appeals in early
1998. The court stated that “each pass resulted in the creation of the
same general conditions” and, therefore, arose out of the same overall
occurrence.
ConclusionThe issue of whether one or several occurrences are involved in
claim situations has complex implications for both insureds, insurers,
and reinsurers. It impacts how and when aggregates are eroded and
excess layers pierced, how much insureds will have to pay in retentions
or deductibles, and when an insurer’s duty to defend ends.
There is no clear right or wrong position for either insureds or
insurers because their situations change with the details of the case. A
greater understanding of how these needs and roles change, however,
will help when establishing insurance programs and analyzing claim
situations.Cyber Liability
SECTION IV
By: Gregory Deimling, CPCU
The Epidemic of Cybercrime
Cybercrime is criminal activity or a crime relating to, or involving
computers or computer networks such as the internet. The February 2018
report from the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) touts
cybercrime as an industry that is relentless, undiminished, and unlikely to
stop. “It is just too easy and too rewarding, and the chances of being caught
and punished are perceived as being too low”. Interpol recognizes
cybercrime as “one of the fastest growing forms of transnational crime faced
by countries today.” Criminals exploit the speed, convenience and anonymity
of the internet to commit a diverse range of criminal activities that know no
borders, either physical or virtual. It will soon likely surpass the profitability
of the global drug trade of all major legal drugs combined.
In the U.S. during 2018 the internet generated $504 billion in sales of
physical goods . In 2018, ecommerce was responsible for around $2.8 trillion
in sales. That number is projected to grow to almost $5 trillion in 2021. It is
estimated that cybercrime created between $600 billion and $1.5 trillion in
global profits in 2018 alone, and that number is projected to grow to over $6
trillion annually by 2021. The FBI has reported damages from cybercrime at
$2.7 billion in 2018, per their “2018 Internet Crime Report”. Although this
number seems low, the number only reflects cybercrimes reported to the
FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint Center. There are huge problems with
calculating the loss numbers, though. The UK, for example, estimates thatonly 13 percent of cybercrimes are reported. These losses will only increase
as economic activity and business is increasingly conducted online.
PriceWaterhouseCoope rs’ 2018 Global Econom ic Crime Survey
confirms the significant, continuing impact of this crime on business, with
now 49 percent of global organizations reporting they have experienced a
cybercrime and over 14 percent of these suffering financial losses of more
than $1 m illion, and 1 pe rcent indicating they had lost over $100 m illion.
According to the February 2018 CSIS and International Security Program
report titled Econom ic Impact of Cybercrime – No Slowing Down, the
worldwide GDP in United States dollars is $75.8 trillion, cybercrime cost in
United States dollars is from $445 to $608 billion, so the percentage loss to
the GDP due to cybercrime is somewhere from 0.59 pe rcent to 0.80 pe rcent.
Types of Cybercrimes
Cybercrime is defined as criminal activity (such as fraud, theft, or
distribution of child pornography) committed using a computer especially to
illegally access, transmit, or manipulate data. Cybercrime encompasses a
vast area of crime, and can generally be divided into two categories; crimes
that target networks or devices, and crimes using devices to participate in
criminal activities. The University of Maryland, School of Engineering has
reported that malicious hackers are now attacking computers and networks at
a rate of one attack every thirty-nine seconds.
Crimes that target

networks or devices Financial Crimes Abuse
Botnets Fraud Grooming
Malware, including Phishing Sexploitation
Ransomware
Network Intrusion Penetration of Online | Bullying

Financial Services

The two most common exploitation techniques, both relatively simple
and inexpensive to execute, are social engineering and the exploitation of
vulnerabilities of equipment, software, installation, or human operators.
Computer-Targeted Crimes
Crimes that target networks or devices generally relate to theft or
manipulation of computer data or services by hacking or viruses. These types
of crimes often result in identity theft, credit card, or bank fraud. These are
usually perceived as a single crime event from the perspective of the victim.
Generally, a virus, or other type of malware, is unknowingly downloaded,
and installs a keystroke logger on the computer. The hacker can then steal
private data such as internet and mobile banking, and email passwords.
Hackers often carry out these crimes by taking advantage of flaws in a web
browser to place a Trojan horse virus onto the unprotected victim’s
computer.
Another common form is phishing. The victim receives a supposedly
legitimate email, quite often claiming to be from a bank or credit card
company, with a link that leads to a hostile website. Once the link is clicked,
the computer can then be infected with a virus. Phishing emails can also lead
an unknowing user to a malicious website disguised as the target website,
where the user inputs their username and password willingly. The user
believes they are logging into their bank account when they are actually
handing the hacker their personal banking information. In 2018 phishing
emails grew by 250 percent and have become more and more difficult to
spot. Hackers and scammers are becoming more creative and skillful at
creating convincing phishing emails, some tricking even the most cautious
users. Around 6.4 bi llion fake emails are sent out every day by scammers and
attackers.
Financial Crimes
PriceWaterhouseCoope rs’ 2018  report Pulling Fraud out of the
Shadow s stated that 41 percent of financial sector respondents said they hadbeen victims of cybercrime, compared with only 26 percent in other
industries. Financial crime is theft of financial assets through cyber
intrusions. According to the June 2014 report from the Center for Strategic
and International Studies, the best data on financial cybercrime comes from
the global financial services sector. Because banks, insurers, investment
firms, etc., who hold and manage both data and money for their customers,
are regulated, they pay attention to cybersecurity and can easily measure loss.
Privacy laws that require firms to report losses when personal information is
compromised mean that the expense of managing the attack $100 million or
more for large incidents can exceed the amount gained by the cyber
criminals.
Retailers are favored targets of cybercriminals because they offer access
to personally identifiable customer and credit card data (issued and
maintained by the banking and credit industries). In the U.S., the Black Friday
attack on retailer Target stores cost the banks over $200 million, not
including Target’s costs or its customers’ expenses. The Symantec Internet
Security Threat Report has reported that cyber criminals can earn up to $2.2
million per month by stealing just 10 c redit cards per website they hack.
Ransomware has been one of the core concerns for cybersecurity
professionals for years. Although ransomware infection rates finally began to
decline in 2018, the stark reality is that almost half of ransomware victims
pay the ransom. 39 percent of the global data breaches caused by malware
were ransomware attacks.
Exploitation Crimes
In exploitation crimes, the computer isn’t the target of the attack. The
computer is a tool used to commit serious crimes of exploitation such as
cyber stalking, harassment, child predation, extortion, blackmail, stock
market manipulation, complex corporate espionage, and planning or carrying
out terrorist activities. These crimes are usually repetitive, involving
multiple interactions with the target. Social media, chat rooms, etc., offer
oppor tunities for predators to stalk, interact with, and establish relationships
and then exploit their victims to commit a crime. Members of criminal and/orterrorist groups can use these same social platforms to plan and discuss
crimes.
Theft of confidential business information is the third largest cost from
cybercrime and cyber espionage because it can be turned into immediate
gain. Stock market manipulation is a growth area for cybercrime. Breaking
into systems and stealing sensitive revenue reports, contract information, or
merger plans can give criminals an advantage in trading.
Cyber theft of intellectual property is of significant concern to
businesses. It impacts the ability to competitively manufacture and deliver
goods  to sustain operations and meet financial commitments. Many
companies do not know that their intellectual property has been stolen until
after the clones have been manufactured and brought to market.
Opportunity Costs
The value of forgone activities cannot be realized when resources are
spent elsewhere. Loss from cybercrimes can result in reduced investment in
research and development, increased spending in network defense, and
avoidance of internet use.
Cybercrime in the United States
PriceWaterhouseCoope rs’ (PwC) Strengthening digital society against
cyber shocks report discloses results from The Global State of Information
Security Survey 2018 . Cybersecurity leaders from PwC, CIO from IDG,
CSO, and clients of PwC from around the globe. They worked with more
than 9,500 CEO’s, CFO’s, CIO’s, CISO’s, CP’s and directors of IT and
security practices from more than 122 countries. The survey found that in
2018:
•    Enterprises are hit much harder by cybersecurity events,
experiencing an average of 196 e vents per year, compared to smallto medium sized businesses (SMB’s) which experience on average
twenty-four per year.
•    Three-quarters of cybersecurity attacks come from outside sources.
•    Hackers have proven to be the greatest cyber threat perpetrating 27
percent of overall attacks.
•    Forty-two percent of companies said they had increased funds used
to combat fraud and economic crime. Significant incidents across
industries:
•    46 pe rcent of respondents said that their organization spent the same
or more on investigations and other interventions than was directly
lost to fraud.
•    44 pe rcent of respondents said they do n ot have an overall
information security strategy.
•    48 pe rcent of respondents said they do n ot have an employee security
awareness training program
•    54 pe rcent of respondents said they do n ot have an incident-response
process
•    A substantial majority of Americans expect major cyberattacks in the
next five years on US public infrastructure or banking and financial
systems.
•    Most information security professionals believe that the US critical
infrastructure will suffer a cyberattack within the next two years.
•    The leaking of some US National Security Administration (NSA)
hacking tools has made highly sophisticated capabilities available to
hackers (discussed later in this chapter)
According to the CSIS ISP report Econom ic Impact of Cybercrime – No
Slowing Down the numbers of estimated daily cybercrime activity are
staggering.
Cybercrime Estimated Daily Activity

Malicious scans 80 billion
New malware 300,000
Phishing 33,000

Ransomware | 4,000
Records lost to hacking 780,000

Correlation of U.S. Cybersecurity Expenditure to
Detected Events
Data has revealed a significant correlation between the level of spending
on cybersecurity and the number of events detected. Organizations operating
in highly-regulated sectors typically have high-performing cybersecurity
programs. They also invest considerably more in cybersecurity than
organizations from other sectors. Banking and finance respondents spent
between $1,300 and $3,000 on cybersecurity per full time or equivalent
employee on cybersecurity, while retail and consumer products businesses
invested up to $400 per employee and education respondents invested a
maximum of $200 per employee. According to a recent Global Economic
Crime Survey by PricewaterhouseCoope rs:
Even when organizations are generally aware of the types of cyber-
threats they face, many do not truly understand the capabilities of
cybercriminals, what they might target, and what the value of those
targets might be. Yet companies continue to make their critical data
available to management, employees, vendors, and clients on a
multitude of platforms, including high-risk platforms such as mobile
devices and the cloud because the economic and competitive benefits
appear so compelling. Ultimately, cybercrime is not strictly speaking a
technology problem. It is a strategy problem, a human problem and a
process problem. After all, organizations are not being attacked by
computers, but by people attempting to exploit human frailty as much as
technical vulnerability.This assessment still rings true. When faced with the seemingly
intractable beast of cybercrime, some organizations decide to pour an
increasing amount of their resources into technology. A lot of fraud that
occurs, though, starts internally so technological advancements can do
little to nothing to prevent those losses. Also, an organization can get
ahead of the train by training their employees to be aware of types of
cyber threats, and be on the lookout for those threats. Because of this,
the industry is seeing a shift from investing more money into the
technology to instead, investing the money into the people who are on
the front lines of the cyber landscape.
Curbing Cybercrime
Acceptable Losses from Cybercrime
Societies tend to absorb the costs of cybercrime as a part of doing
business. There is difficulty in monetizing cybercrime, though, according to
the CSIS ISP report Econom ic Impact of Cybercrime – No Slowing Down.
Criminals don’t always gain the full value of what they have stolen.
Cybercrime is not the most expensive illegal activity, but money may not be
the best metric. Consumer confidence and national security are examples of
other costs. Also, cybercrime has the ability to make hundreds of millions of
individuals victims in hundreds of ways. The report states that a good
estimate is that 2/3 of the people online, more than two billion individuals,
have had their personal information stolen or compromised online. Although
it may not be the most detrimental, the reason that cybercrime is such a hot
topic is that it effects everyone. The internet has become the forefront of
commercial endeavors affecting all facets of commerce. There are no
existing entities, for profit or not-for-profit, governmental or quasi-
governmental, or individually owned which are not touched in some form by
the computer and the internet.
Large enterprises are constantly evaluating their cyber exposures;
however, small and medium enterprises are just beginning to awaken to thenew reality. That reality is that the cyber-criminal now has the tools to easily
hack into any system that ever attaches to the information highway, the
internet.
The Cost of a Data Breach
The 2018 Cost of Data Breach Study: Impact of Business Continuity
Manage ment (BCM), sponsored by IBM and the Ponemon Institute,
thoroughly analyzes the direct first party cost of a data breach. The report
issued in October of 2018 provides data covering 477 companies
representing thirteen countries and two regions. The costs incurred by
organizations experiencing a data breach are significant regardless of the size
of the organization. In relative terms whether the breach involves 2,500 or
100,000 a t-risk records, the organization will experience direct, indirect, and
oppor tunity costs emanating from the cyber-event. The overall cost of a
cyber-event is influenced by regulation. Those industries which are highly-
regulated find their cost to be much greater than those with lesser regulatory
and compliance requirements. Therefore, industries such as healthcare,
financial services, pharmaceuticals, transportation, and communications
experience a higher cost from cybercrimes.
One of the biggest challenges facing business entities is the retention of
their customer’s loyalty and the development of the means and methods to
restore confidence in the organizations ability to protect the customer’s
personal data. One method is to have in place a crisis management plan to
handle the reputational damage inflicted by the cybercrime. It is important
that these plans be driven by the top-down with the CEO, board chairman, or
owner fully committed to immediately begin a planned response and
remediation to the loss of personal or private information.
Direct Cost
The direct cost of a data breach includes all identifiable items of cost that
are measureable from an accounting standpoint. Detection and repair of thebreach, notification cost, ongoing notification and monitoring cost, and legal
and administrative cost are examples of direct cost.
Regulations are being drafted that require a company that has suffered a
data breach to provide credit monitoring for a year or more for consumers
whose data has been breached.
The Ponemon study found that the average expenditures are $0.16 million
for notification, and $1.23 million for detection and escalation, and 1.23
million in ex-post response in 2018.
Indirect Cost
Indirect costs are those associated with the loss of business, i.e.,
customer-retention programs. Also included in the indirect cost are those
expenses associated with potential third-party liability claims such as
defense cost from lawsuits, credit card reissuance cost, consumer redress
funds, and other fines and penalties. According to the Ponemon study, the loss
business cost was on average $1.45 m illion in 2018.
On average in 2018 data breach for the companies represented by the
Ponemon study cost $148 per record taking both direct and indirect costs in
consideration.
Opportunity Cost
The oppor tunity costs are financial resources that must be directed away
from business activities that create value and growth to handle the costs of
managing the cybercrime. The ultimate case would be where the breach was
so consuming that the business or entity attacked by the cyber-criminal was
forced into bankruptcy or closure. (While the oppor tunity costs have been
separated for our treatment, most researchers include missed oppor tunity cost
as an additional indirect cost. Regardless of where these cost are shown it is
important to recognize them in the total cost of cyber risk.)Most of the available data regarding direct, indirect and opportunity
costs support the point that the costs of handling a data breach or system
attack continues to rise. The current study released in October 2018 indicates
an average response cost of $4.24 m illion.
Individual elements of the cost are becoming more predictable and
therefore, from a risk management perspective, more manageable. Those
entities with response plans in place are experiencing cost reductions in
some areas of both direct and indirect costs.
Large attacks on well-known and respected organizations make headline
news. In 2016 Yahoo! confirmed that its significant 2013 and 2014 data
breaches actually compromised all three billion of their user accounts, and
reportedly cost the company $350 m illion.
In November 2018, Marriott International announced that cybercriminals
had stolen data on approximately 500 million of Marriott’s customers. The
initial Marriott breach occurred in 2014 but the hackers stayed in the system
until after September 2018. Some victims of the Marriott breach only had
their names and telephone numbers compromised while for others the
attackers were able to take a combination of contact info, passport numbers,
and other personal information. Marriott estimates that the credit card
numbers of more than 100 million customers were stolen. This data breach is
still under investigation and may add up to $915 m illion.
Target stores experienced a data breach in the fourth quarter of 2013. On
February 26, 2014 Target released their fourth quarter earnings report which
indicated a revenue loss of 5.3 percent and a reduction of profit by 46
percent. The report also identified $61 million dollars in breach related
expenses and a $17 million dollar reduction in the bottom line. Moreover, it
was reported within days of the breach that several multi-million dollar
lawsuits had been filed. At the company’s first quarter Earnings Call on
May 21, 2014, i n addressing the data breach:
Expenses may include payments associated with potential claims by the
payment card networks for alleged counterfeit fraud losses and non-
ordinary course operating expenses (such as card re-issuance costs),
REDcard fraud and card re-issuance expense, payments associated withcivil litigation, governmental investigations and enforcement
proceedings, expenses for legal, investigative and consulting fees, and
incremental expenses and capital investments for remediation activities.
These costs may have a material adverse effect on Target’s results of
operations in second quarter and full-year 2014 a nd future periods.
However, at the other end of the cyber spectrum are thousands of small
businesses who are experiencing an increasing number of cyber-attacks. With
new tools that make it easier for hackers to prey on small businesses, these
entities have become an easy target for the criminal cartels operating in
around the world.
In 2017 the United States National Security Agency (NSA) was breached
resulting in a worldwide cyberattack by the WannaCry ransomware
cryptoworm. WannaCry targeted computers that ran Microsoft Windows by
encrypting the data and demanding ransom in the form of Bitcoin
cryptocurrency. WannaCry came from Eternal Blue, which was an exploit
developed by the NSA. Although Microsoft had released patches to prevent
breaches for many of the WannaCry exploits, most of the owners of affected
computers had failed to apply the updates. The attack was estimated to have
effected more than 200,000 computers over 150 countries, with total
damages ranging from hundreds of millions to billions of dollars.
While there are many such events happening every day, the Wall Street
Journal reported the Burger Me LLC incident. In 2006 and 2007, Burger Me,
a small restaurant business owned by Rich Griffith of Bellington,
Washington, had a computerized cash register system often referred to as a
point-of-sale system. Burger Me accepted credit cards. The system was
hacked. Unknown to Burger Me, the criminals made fraudulent charges to its
customers’ credit cards. As the fraud began to unravel, and the source traced
to Burger Me, the firm’s credit card services provider shut down the Burger
Me account and froze payment transfers, drying up the cash flow needed to
support the business activity. Unable to accept credit cards, shrinking
customer flows and mounting debt forced the business to close and liquidate.
The hacker was never identified. While large organizations like Target may
recover, small business may not completely rebound, if at all.Small businesses, defined as those employing fewer than 250 employees,
are facing a growing assault from cyber criminals all over the world. This
means that any organization is a potential target. Another Ponemon Institute
study, The 2018 State of Cybersecurity in Small and Medium Sized
Businesses, has published some shocking results:
•    43 pe rcent of cyberattacks target small businesses.
•    67 pe rcent of small businesses had suffered a cyberattack within the
twelve months prior to the study
•    58 pe rcent had experienced a data breach in the twelve months prior
to the study
•    47 pe rcent of respondents reported having no understanding of how
to protect their companies against cyberattacks.
A Change of Culture
The acceleration of change and the amount of change occurring from the
technological advances being thrust upon the global economy are causing a
radical shift in organizational cultures.
In order to win in the current cyber-crime assault the determination must
be driven from the top-down. Thus, it is everyone’s task to be vigilant and
relentlessly protect the intangible assets of the enterprise. The size of the
organization does not matter. The type of organization does not matter.
Network security and privacy efforts will fail if everyone does not embrace
the task at hand.
Everybody Is a Publisher
The risk and exposures associated with words, communication,
advertising, and a host of other produced material are exacerbated by the
speed at which communication can be sent and by the overwhelming ability
to keep and store that communication over time. Additionally, thegeographical boundaries of space and time have effectively been eliminated.
What once lasted only for the life of the physical document and was
contained in a defined space can now be sent around the world in seconds
and remain permanently. Content liability exposures are now expanding like
never before with communication platforms, such as Facebook , LinkedIn,
Twitter, Snapchat, blogs, instant messaging, video conferencing, online
transactions, RSS feeds, and a host of others. With this technology also
comes malware, intrusion software, phishing, spy bots, and other dangerous
criminal activity. Anyone can be a publisher of information that can exist
indefinitely.
Cyber Liability
Historically, improvements in communication methods have directly
benefited commerce. Today, the internet, computer networks, and technology
have enabled mass communication of ideas, information, and marketing with
the ability of direct purchase of goods  at vastly reduced costs. No paper, no
phone calls, no visits to the business establishment are required. The internet
is not bound by time or space. It allows commerce to operate 24/7 without
geographic boundaries and unlike paper; the information does not fade away
but often indefinitely remains. It allows businesses to store customer/client
data that can be used for improved products, services, ordering processes,
and advertising. The internet and our constantly changing and improving
culture of technology provides “the ease of doing business” for both the
seller and the buyer.
Utilizing technology can create significant benefits for businesses.
Likewise, the use of technology can create for the business new risk
exposures called cyber risks. Cyber risks differ from the traditional risk
exposures in types, form, detection, liability, regulation, and most importantly
costs. Traditionally, businesses have utilized the commercial general liability
(CGL) policy as a tool to manage business liability risks. Today’s
businesses, however, may find that the CGL policy does not provide the
coverages to adequately manage cyber liabilities, and instead must utilizestand-alone cyber liability insurance policies or specifically designed add-
on endorsements to their traditional policies.
Applicability of the CGL Policy to Cyber Risk Exposures
The comprehensive general liability (CGL) policy was first introduced in
1941. Correspondence was produced on manual typewriters and mailed
through the postal service. Information was manually recorded on paper and
filed in filing cabinets. These represented the standard business processes at
the time. In 1986  Insurance Service Offices (ISO) introduced the commercial
general liability forms and endorsements to replace the comprehensive
general liability forms. By 1986 larger businesses were at the early stages of
today’s technology with large main frame computers, priority software, CRT
or dumb terminals directly connected to the main frame, storing only the
necessary data as storage space was both limited and expensive for business
processes. Smaller businesses had moved to electronic typewriters. There
was no internet. The CGL forms were created prior to the advent of today’s
cyber-related exposures.
Traditionally many businesses have managed their liability exposures
with the purchase of a commercial general liability (CGL) policy. Since
1986 ISO has regularly updated the CGL forms and endorsements. The
updates generally clarify the intent of the coverages afforded in response to
legal decisions. As cyber liability risks have emerged, the revised CGL
forms and endorsements have developed progressively restrictive language
and exclusions to clarify the coverage (or non-coverage) intent for the ever
evolving business cyber risks exposures. At the same time stand-alone cyber
liability forms have been created by ISO and a number of insurers.
The following information discusses the evolution of the CGL form
pertaining to cyber risks. For a more detailed analysis of the CGL form, the
reader is referred to Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide, 12th
Edition, by Donald S. Malecki, CPCU, and founder of Malecki, Deimling,
Nielander & Associates, David Thamann, J.D., CPCU, and ARM, and
Hannah E. Smith, J.D. published by The National Underwriter Company.In the Beginning – Y2K
The first cyber liability exposure to garner a CGL policy revision was
the Y2K (Year 2000)  issue. There was general concern that massive
computer generated issues would occur when the world moved from the year
1999 to 2000 at midnight December 31, 1999. Due to the high cost of data
storage when proprietary computer programs were created in the 1960s ,
1970s  and into the 1980s  only a two digit code was used for the year, so at
the turn of the century 99 would turn to 00. ISO introduced in 1998
endorsement CG 04 31 Year 2000 Computer-Related and Other Electronic
Problems Limited Coverage Options. This is now past history. Although
some problems did develop, the impact did not reach the massive scale that
was anticipated because companies and organizations worldwide checked
and upgraded their computer systems to address the anticipated problem, so
many computers remained unaffected. The ISO Computer-Related and Other
Electronic Problems Limited Coverage Options endorsement is still in use
today.
Covered Territory
One element for coverage to apply is that the damages or offenses take
place in specific territory. The CGL form, 2001 edition, revised the scope of
covered territory for personal and advertising injury offenses coverage with
a change to the definition of coverage territory under c.
4.    “ Coverage territory” means:
a.    The United States of America (including its territories and pos sessions),
Puerto Rico and Canada;
b.    I nternational waters or airspace, but only if the injury or damage occurs
in the course of travel or transportation between any places included in a.
above ; or
c.    All other parts of the world if the injury or damage arises out of:
1)    Goods  or products made or sold by you in the territory described in a.
above ;
2)    The activities of a person whose home is in the territory described in a.
above , but is away for a short time on your business; or3)    “Personal and advertising injury” offenses that take place through the
Internet or similar electronic means of communication provided the insured’s
responsibility to pay damages is determined in a “suit” on the merits, in the
territory described in a. above  or in a settlement we agree to.
Prior to the 2001 edition, if the injury had been sustained outside of the
territories listed in “a”, then no coverage existed. Otherwise, it needed to be
determined that the offense took place in the territories listed in “a”. As the
internet or other electronic means of communication is worldwide with no
geographic boundaries, maintaining this standard became very difficult. Now
an injury can take place worldwide, provided the offense meets the definition
of personal and advertising injury, and occurs through the internet or similar
electronic means of communication. However, the insured’s responsibility to
pay damages must be determined in a suit in the territories listed in “a”. The
policy will also pay damages when the insurer agrees to a settlement.
Tangible Property
The CGL policy provides coverage for physical damage to tangible
property and its resulting loss of use. Businesses commonly have two types
of property: tangible and intangible. Generally, property to be classified as
tangible should possess attributes that allow it to be viewed and touched
while intangible property does not. Questions arose if electronic data was
tangible property or not, as data when displayed can be viewed; it can be
printed on paper that can be touched. To clarify that electronic data was not
intended to be treated as tangible property under the policy, the 2001 edition
modified the definition of property damage.
“Property damage” means:
a.    Physical injury to tangible property, including all resulting loss of use of
that property. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the
physical injury that caused it; or
b.    L oss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured. All such
loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the “occurrence” that
caused it.For the purposes of this insurance, electronic data is not tangible
property.
As used in this definition, electronic data means information, facts or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted to or from
computer software, including systems and applications software, hard or
floppy  disks, CD-ROMS, tapes, drives, cells, data processing devices, or
any other media which are used with electronically controlled equipment.
Therefore, electronic data does not meet the definition of property
damage as defined in the 2001 a nd subsequent editions of the CGL form.
Personal and Advertising Injury
Historically, advertising liability coverage has been available to
businesses since the early 1940s . Personal injury liability coverage has been
available since the late 1950s . In the 1998 CGL edition the two coverages
were combined as personal and advertising injury coverage. Personal and
advertising injury coverage concepts originating prior to the internet,
personal computers, social networks, chat rooms, blogs, mobile devices,
apps, and other modern modes of instantaneous communications. As business
internet activities increasingly became a method of conducting business, ISO
introduced the 2001 CGL form that contained significant revisions
addressing Internet activities.
The 2001 edition modified slightly offenses d. and e. with the addition of
the words “in any manner” that many understand to include internet and cyber
type activities.
“Personal and advertising injury” means injury, including consequential
“bodily injury”, arising out of one or more of the following offenses:
a.    False arrest, detention or imprisonment;
b.    M alicious prosecution;
c.    The wrongful eviction from, wrongful entry into, or invasion
of the right of private occupancy of a room, dwelling orpremises that a person occupies, committed by or on behalf of
its owner, landlord or lessor;
d.    O ral or written publication, in any manner, of material that
slanders or libels a person or organization or disparages a
person’s or organization’s goods , products or services;
e.    O ral or written publication, in any manner, of material that
violates a person’s right of privacy;
f.    The use of another’s advertising idea in your “advertisement”;
or
g.    Infringing upon another’s copyright, trade dress or slogan in
your “advertisement”.
Offenses f. and g. concern risks in the insured’s “advertisement”. The
2001 e dition modified the definition of advertisement.
1.    “ Advertisement” means a notice that is broadcast or published to the
general public or specific market segments about your goods , products
or services for the purpose of attracting customers or supporters. For
the purposes of this definition:
a.    N otices that are published include material placed on the
Internet or on similar electronic means of communication; and
b.    R egarding Web sites, only that part of a Web site that is about
your goods , products or services for the purposes of attracting
customers or supporters is considered an advertisement.
The definition was expanded to include the internet and similar
electronic communication means and then placed restrictions concerning
websites. Only parts of a business website may be considered advertisement.
Other definitions modified in the 2001 edition to address cyber-type
activities are “covered territory” and “property damage” discussed above .ISO also made some changes to personal and advertising injury coverage
exclusions b. and c. in the 2013 edition incorporating the words “in any
manner”. This was consistent with the change made to offenses d. and e. in
the definition of “personal and advertising injury”.
b.    M aterial Published With Knowledge of Falsity
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of oral or written
publication, in any manner, of material, if done by or at the
direction of the insured with knowledge of its falsity.
c.    M aterial Published Prior To Policy Period
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of oral or written
publication, in any manner, of material whose first publication
took place before the beginning of the policy period.
Historically, advertising injury coverage has excluded the insured’s
liability when in the business of advertising, publishing, and broadcasting -
as this is more appropriately insured under a separate advertiser’s or media
liability policy. In the 2001 edition of the CGL form, the exclusion was
expanded to specifically include website design and content development for
others and internet search, access, content or service provider businesses.
For these businesses a separate advertiser’s or media liability policy is
necessary to address these exposures.
j.    Insureds in Media and Internet Type Businesses
“Personal and advertising injury” committed by an insured whose business
is:
1)    Advertising, broadcasting, publishing or telecasting;
2)    Designing or determining content of Web sites for others; or
3)    An Internet search, access, content or service provider.
However, this exclusion does not apply to Paragraphs 14.a ., b., a nd c. of
“personal and advertising injury” under the Definitions Section.For the purposes of this exclusion, the placing of frames, borders or links, or
advertising, for you or others anywhere on the Internet, is not by itself,
considered the business of advertising, broadcasting, publishing or
telecasting.
Note that businesses that have online bulletin boards and chat rooms
should also be aware of the 2001 C GL revision adding exclusion k.
k.    Electronic Chatrooms or Bulletin Boards
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of an electronic chatroom or
bulletin board the insured hosts, owns, or over which the insured exercises
control.
ISO continued in its 2001 CGL edition to exclude e-commerce risks with
the addition of exclusion l.
l.    U nauthorized Use of Another’s Name or Product
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the unauthorized use of
another’s name or product in your e-mail address, dom ain name or metatag,
or any other similar tactics to mislead another’s potential customers.
A final cyber risk related exclusion added in the 2001 CGL edition is
exclusion p.–D istribution of Material in Violation of Statutes that is the same
as under Coverage A Bodily Injury and Property Damage discussed below.
The 2001 CGL edition contained numerous changes, many of which
restricted cyber risk coverage.
Electronic Data
The 2004 edition of the CGL form from ISO provided additional support
to the 2001 property definition modification that electronic data was not
tangible property by adding under Section I Coverages; Coverage A Bodily
Injury and Property Damage Liability, Exclusion p. “Electronic Data”
Damages arising out of the loss of, loss of use of, damage to, corruption of,
inability to access, or inability to manipulate electronic data.As used in this exclusion, electronic data means information, facts or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted to or from
computer software, including systems and applications software, hard or
floppy  disks, CD-ROMS, tapes, drives, cells, data processing devices or any
other media which are used with electronically controlled equipment.
Exclusions c. through n. do n ot apply to damage by fire to premises while
rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner.
A separate limit of insurance applies to this coverage as described in Section
III – Limits of Insurance.
In 2004 , ISO also introduced an Electronic Data Liability Coverage
Form (CG 00 65). Insureds that faced the risk of such damage could purchase
a stand-alone policy.
In the 2013 e dition of the CGL form, ISO added this language:
“However, this exclusion does not apply to liability for damages because of
bodily injury.”
Recording and Distribution of Material or Information in
Violation of Law
In response to the TCPA and CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 including statutes,
ordinances, or regulations that prohibits or limits the sending, transmitting,
communicating or distribution of material or information, ISO created an
exclusionary endorsement (CG 00 67) in 2005 to prevent coverage from
being provided in the CGL form. In the 2007 CGL filing, ISO incorporated
the endorsement as exclusions under both Section I Coverages, Coverage A
Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability, and Coverage B Personal and
Advertising Injury Liability.
Distribution of Material in Violation of Statutes
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising directly or indirectly out of any
action or omission that violates or is alleged to violate:1)    The Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA), including any
amendment of or addition to such law; or
2)    The CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, i ncluding any amendment of or
addition to such law; or
3)    Any statute, ordinance or regulation, other than the TCPA or
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, t hat prohibits or limits the sending,
transmitting, communicating or distribution of material or
information.
Exclusions c. through n. do n ot apply to damage by fire to premises while
rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with permission of the owner.
A separate limit of insurance applies to this coverage as described in Section
III – Limits of Insurance.
The exclusion was revised in the 2013 edition of the CGL form with the
addition of further restrictive 4) language.
4)    Any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation, other
than the TCPA, CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 or  FCRA and their
amendments and additions, that addresses, prohibits, or limits the
printing, dissemination, disposal, collecting, recording, sending,
transmitting, communicating or distribution of material or
information.
Absolute Exclusion
ISO provided further evidence that the intent of the CGL is to provide
minimal coverage, if any, for cyber liability and associated risks with the
introduction of a series of exclusionary endorsements on the access or
disclosure of confidential or personal information and data-related liability.
These endorsements significantly reduce if not eliminate coverage should a
business receive a claim or lawsuit resulting from a data breach.
The frequency of the occurrence of data breaches has grown
exponentially in the last few years and the trend will only continue to
increase. Data breach claims can result in large legal fees and/or payment oflarge fines, plus additional costs in forensic system detection, notification,
and credit monitoring services. There continues to be two camps of thought
regarding the intent of coverage provided under the commercial general
liability coverage part for cyber risk. One side believes that the construction
of the coverage language provides coverage, even though when this coverage
part was developed there was not much “cyber” risk to consider. The other
side has consistently recognized that certain cybercrimes such as data
breaches and network security failures are new exposures driven by
technology for which the CGL form never contemplated providing coverage.
With the recent changes of filing CG 21 06 05 14 the point is mute.
Regardless of whose interpretation is correct, the CGL form provides only a
minor exception to an exclusion for bodily injury, otherwise, cyber risks are
excluded in both coverage A and coverage B.
Endorsement CG 21 06 05 14
The Exclusion Access or Disclosure of Confidential or Personal
Information and Data-Related Liability With Limited Bodily Injury Exception
endorsement (CG 21 06 05 14) modifies insurance provided under the CGL
Section I Coverage A Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability by
replacing exclusion 2 p. E lectronic Data.
p.    Access or Disclosure of Confidential or Personal Information and
Data-related Liability
Damages arising out of:
1)    Any access to or disclosure of any person’s or organization’s
confidential or personal information, including patents, trade
secrets, processing methods, customer lists, financial
information, credit card information, health information or any
other type of nonpublic information; or
2)    The loss of, loss of use of, damage to, corruption of, inability to
access, or inability to manipulate electronic data.
This exclusion applies even if damages are claimed for notification costs,
credit monitoring expenses, forensic expenses, public relations expenses orany other loss, cost or expense incurred by you or others arising out of that
which is described in Paragraph 1) or 2) above .
However, unless Paragraph 1) above  applies, this exclusion does not apply
to damages because of “bodily injury”.
As used in this exclusion, electronic data means information, facts or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted to or from
computer software, including systems and applications software, hard or
floppy  disks, CD-ROMs, tapes, drives, cells, data processing devices or any
other media which are used with electronically controlled equipment.
B.    The following is added to Paragraph 2. Exclusions of Section I –
Coverage B – Personal and Advertising Injury Liability:
2.    E xclusions
This insurance does not apply to:
Access or Disclosure of Confidential or Personal Information
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of any access to or
disclosure of any person’s or organization’s confidential or personal
information, including patents, trade secrets, processing methods,
customer lists, financial information, credit card information, health
information or any other type of nonpublic information.
This exclusion applies even if damages are claimed for notification costs,
credit monitoring expenses, forensic expenses, public relations
expenses or any other loss, cost or expense incurred by you or others
arising out of any access to or disclosure of any person’s or
organization’s confidential or personal information.
Endorsement CG 21 07 05 14
The endorsement–Exclusions Access or Disclosure of Confidential or
Personal Information and Data-Related Liability Limited Bodily Injury
Exception Not Included (CG 21 07 05 14) is almost the same as (CG 21 06
05 14) but without the wording that the exclusion does not apply to damagesbecause of bodily injury under Coverage A Bodily Injury and Property
Damage. Therefore, bodi ly injury damages are not excluded.
The endorsement Exclusion Access or Disclosure of Confidential or
Personal Information (Coverage B Only) (CG 21 08 05 14) applies only to
Coverage B, Personal and Advertising Injury Liability and leaves Coverage
A Bodily Injury and Property Damage in the CGL policy as is.
Effectually, these three endorsements reduce coverage in both part A and
part B of CG 00 01, commercial general liability form. In general, these
endorsements are further evidence that the CGL coverage part was not
intended to provide coverage for cyber related events. The types of damages
related to data breaches and other data related liabilities including the cost of
remediation, notification, credit reporting and other associated loss costs are
more appropriately covered under specific stand-alone cyber policies or
specific coverage endorsements attached to the traditional policies. This
reduction of coverage is further reinforced by the fact CG 21 06 05 14 is a
mandatory endorsement under the rules and rates as promulgated by ISO.
While only these three endorsements have been highlighted, the filing
contains additional endorsements affecting the electronic data coverage part,
the commercial umbrella coverage part, the commercial excess liability
coverage part, owners and contractors protected liability, and products
completed operations coverage parts. All of these endorsements are
consistent and reinforce the coverage intent as respects damages related to
data breaches and data related liabilities. Coverage is not afforded.
Over the course of the last two decades the industry has witnessed the
removal and restriction of previously offered cyber coverage and is now
entering an era where the commercial general liability policy can no longer
be called “general”. Similar to the total and absolute pollution exclusion in
previous years, the narrowing of coverage and expansion of exclusions for
cyber exposures has come full circle with the May 2014 filing of
endorsements by ISO leaving cyber liability, electronic, and a host of defined
electronic activities without any coverage within the current CGL policy.
That said, that group of endorsements tends to confuse the producers and
clients as there are carve out and specific exceptions still allowed. It is too
soon to know whether the carriers will escalate the endorsements to the pointof absolute cyber liability exclusion. It does beg the question, did ISO go far
enough? It would appear that a single mandatory absolute exclusion would
serve both the carriers and the insurance buying consumers attempting to find
coverage for known cyber exposures. The prediction is that the die is cast
and both producers and consumers alike need to understand that just like
pollution, employer’s liability and other liability insurance, coverage needs
are not to be found nor relied upon to exist in the CGL policy.
NAIC Model Law and ISO Policy
Because of the significant and growing number of data breaches that are
seemingly not covered by CGL insurance, the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has developed the Insurance Data Security
Model Law. The model law is an attempt to develop standards for the
investigation and notification to the state insurance commissioners of a
cybersecurity event that occurs to any licensee. The model law will affect the
licensees, or carriers, in the states where the law is adopted. States may
adopt the law as is, create statutes or regulations, or take no action. So far
Michigan, South Carolina and Ohio have adopted the model law, but several
other states have indicated that they will follow suit in the next few years.
The model law discusses implementing an information security program,
conducting a successful risk assessment, implementing appropriate risk
management techniques, the appropriate oversight of the board and third-
party providers, incident response plans, and appropriate annual
certification.
Further, ISO’s Commercial Cyber Policy (CY 00 01 01 18) provides
coverage for security breach expense, which is expenses such as forensics to
research and investigate the breach, notify parties affected, overtime pay for
those handling the breach, call center operations, post event monitoring and
other expenses. Extortion threats, replacement/restoration of electronic data,
business income and extra expense, public relations expense, and security
breach liability, are covered as well. Several enhancements and
endorsements that address the cyber policy are also available, as well as
multi-state applications and Declarations. The cyber policy includes sixseparate insuring agreements due to the tendency of cyberattacks to be
discovered after a significant period of time has lapsed between the incident
and the loss. The policy will pay for
•    losses that are a direct result of a security breach discovered during
the policy period,
•    the costs associated with the investigation and determination of
whether a breach has occurred,
•    other costs to remediate the conditions that led to the security breach
•    costs to notify all affected parties of the security breach
•    ove rtime salaries of employees handling inquiries from affected
parties
•    a hired call center to handle inquiries from parties affected by the
security breach
•    costs to provide identity and credit monitoring services to those
affected by the breach for a period of  up to one year (or more if
required by law), and
•    other reasonable expenses
Complex Underwriting
It is extremely difficult to determine how large the cyber insurance
market currently is in the United States. This is due to the fact that many
carriers do not separate the coverage line for reporting purposes as is done
for the traditional coverage lines of business. The conventional wisdom is
that the annual premium volume is in excess of a $2.5 billion and are likely
to grow to $7.5 billion by the year 2020. In either event the potential market
is huge and expanding. From a revenue stand point, cyber coverages could
rise to those of the CGL policy, especially in the small to medium sized risksector as every business has a need for some cyber liability products. The
question still to be answered: “Are the producers who control much of this
marketplace able to provide the necessary selling skills to penetrate the
market?” Market penetration is the biggest challenge facing the insurers.
Cyber exposures still present a challenge to the insurers because of the
difficulty to understand and then create a pricing model that can actually
handle the losses generated. Those models determine the capital and
resources that the carrier must commit in order to support the product. A real
challenge is the catastrophic nature of the exposures. Cost information still
shows an average incident cost of approximately $3.86 million. Currently,
available individual limits highlight the caution carriers are taking in offering
the coverage. This is also why so much capital is being spent on add-on
services and benefits. Controlling the outcomes of the loss as it develops
offers huge returns in mitigating the loss cost. Looking forward, this coverage
may find pretesting vulnerabilities and prevention has the greatest potential.
Much like engineering and inspection has done for the mechanical
breakdown exposures.
In the trench, the submission process is fairly simple and would not be
referenced as complex by most standards. While applications are not
standardized, most carriers will underwrite and rate based upon most of the
major carriers’ applications. Then as a condition to placing coverage, the
carrier places the requirement of providing their own completed and signed
application. Underwriters may ask for supplemental applications based upon
reported risk characteristics and here again, this does really cause additional
complexity to the submission.
The amount of time to actually receive an offer of terms and conditions
with pricing varies greatly. It depends solely upon the resources which the
carrier places upon the policy acquisition side and the appetite for new
policies. It is further dependent upon whether the product line has technology
support or if the product is manually produced. Regardless, a producer
should expect the carrier to be responsive in less than thirty calendar days.
The level of complexity is not on the underwriting side, but does exist on
the acquisition or selling side. Since cyber liability is a sold product and
there are so many variables in exposure and need, the producer must put fortha great amount of effort to know what he/she is selling. This is especially
true in the small to medium marketplace where the producer is looked upon
as an advisor to the insurance buyer. The structure of the marketplace causes
the retail agent/broker to establish a relationship with an excess, surplus, and
specialty broker in order to obtain access to the product and/or a specific
market. Additionally, most excess, surplus, and specialty lines brokers
require some type of producer representation agreement which further delays
and frustrate the acquisition process at the retail level. This market structure
removes significant amounts of compensation from the retail producer who
does most of the heavy lifting during acquisition. The redundancy of functions
including the movement of information causes such inefficiency that it has
become a hindrance to market penetration. Much of the cyber liability market
is only offered through the specialty markets. While some carriers do
provide the coverage on admitted paper, much of this market is only
available on non-admitted paper in the individual state. Thus, the retail
producer must contend with the state’s excess and surplus lines tax laws upon
non admitted carriers providing the insurance coverage.
The Coverage Availability
Today the available cyber liability policies provide coverage for a host
of exposures facing firms with network security and privacy exposures. In
2008, the Insurance Services Office unveiled its E-Commerce program. The
program was recently updated with a country-wide filing showing forms
dated 01 2014. The program provides for eight independent coverage
agreements which the insured can choose to buy based upon his risk and
exposure needs. The basic policy is The Information Security Protection
Policy, EC 00 10 01 14. There is a specific program for financial institutions
issued under EC 00 11 01 14, Financial Institution Information Security
Protection Policy. In addition, there are specific policies for entities engaged
in media, the Media and Information Security Protection Policy, EC 00 12
and EC 00 13 01 14. The Media policy has two coverage forms: one
providing coverage on an “occurrence basis” and the other providing
coverage on a “claims-made basis”.New Optional Coverage
In addition, ISO is expanding coverage by adding new endorsements. EC
20 09 provides coverage for defense expenses and fines or penalties
assessed by regulatory proceedings. Endorsement EC 20 12 provides
coverage for payment card industry (PCI) compliance violations. Also,
coverage can be added for computer and fund transfer fraud, computer fraud,
and telephone toll fraud through the use of new endorsements, EC 20 13, EC
20 14, a nd EC 20 15 r espectfully.
Producers and insureds alike need to be aware that only those coverages
shown (chosen) in the declaration are applicable. Another important aspect
of this program is to recognize that defense cost is inside the policy limit.
(Unlike the commercial general liability coverage part where defense cost is
generally outside of the coverage limit that is available to indemnify the third
party.) This means that the cost of defense will lower the dollars available
for indemnity. Thus, a limit of $1 million and a loss having $300,000 in
defense cost only leaves $700,000 for indemnity to the third-party. This is
particularly important when choosing individual policy limits.
Within each of the forms, there are eight insuring agreements. The eight
insuring agreements cover both first-party losses as well as third-party
liability. The eight agreements are:
1.    W eb Site Publishing Liability
2.    S ecurity Breach Liability
3.    P rogramming Errors and Omissions Liability
4.    R eplacement or Restoration of Electronic Data
5.    E xtortion Threats
6.    B usiness Income and Extra Expense
7.    P ublic Relations Expense
8.    S ecurity Breach Expense
Section VII Definitions provides for the policy definition of thirty-five
terms as used within the policy. It is important for anyone dealing with cyber
coverage to make themselves aware of these terms. Cyber encompasses such
a large number of terms with multiple meanings that definitions are often lost.
Yet when a claim occurs these defined terms will decide to what and how thecoverage will respond. Producers are cautioned to take the time to learn
what cyber coverage encompasses so that they can be proactive to an
insured’s request for coverage using the requisite skills and knowledge to
respond appropriately. The market is expansive for these types of coverages.
As of 2018, in the U.S. market alone there were a total of 40.8 million self-
employed Americans. What stands out about this group is that an
overwhelming majority of these entrepreneurs utilize the internet and many
third-party vendors in their business and personal activities. More directly,
most have the vast exposure to cybercrime and a growing need for cyber
liability coverage.
While ISO established a standard cyber policy in the marketplace,
(which can be found in Appendix A) there is a large variation among the
carriers providing stand-alone policies. There is an even wider disparity
among those insurance carriers providing add-on cyber coverage by
endorsement to a traditional policy.
The chart below points out that not all policies are created equal nor is
the risk appetite standardized.
More importantly, add-on risk management services really differentiated
the carriers’ offerings. These value added risk control and management
services can easily justify the premium differences among the carriers. Most
of these additional resources are being developed by specialists in the field
of cyber security and then being made available to the policyholder at noadditional or a very nominal charge. Such services as call center and
notification response, cyber specialist attorneys, crisis management
assistance, forensic assistance, training, testing for system vulnerability and
credit monitoring are only a few of the offerings provided. There are also
pre-loss services such as a help desk or information portals to assist the
insured in managing the cyber exposure.
Third-Party Outsourcing
Technology has given rise to an economy where businesses in a
particular industry want to compete above  the line in the marketplace where
their products or services stand out for the best in class, design, features,
functions, benefits, or services. Below the line where all the administrative
functions and business needs are met, these same managers only want the best
in service at an ever decreasing cost. What has occurred is that outsourcing
and third-party specialist have begun to dominate these functional but
necessary areas.
For small and medium sized organizations it allows access to skills and
services that would be out of reach if they had to provide and support those
functions on their own. Most would not survive the added overhead and
burden.
These highly skilled providers usually operate under a contractual
relationship. Generally, these contracts or service level agreements (SLA’s)
containing page upon page of legalese are quickly dispatched with a hasty
signature. The devil is in the small print. Most of these agreements contain
language which leave businesses without recourse should the vendor cause a
problem. The latest of which has been a limitation of liability clause in the
event that the vendor was indeed held liable for the occurrence of an adverse
event. These clauses cap the limit of potential liability to some percentage of
the contract price or value of one year’s service payments. For example,
assume your business involves a third-party vendor and that vendor’s
negligence allowed a data breach of your network security system. The loss
amounted to $100,000. You paid the vendor $200 a month for its services. Aliability limitation clause with a one year limit means your business would
receive $2,400 a s compensation from the vendor.
When considering these types of agreements, at the very least, read them
before signing. It may be difficult to have these providers change their
agreements but it can be done. If these agreements address services regarding
information assets, then a simple vetting of the vendor could potentially save
your business future losses. Ask questions and discuss what service levels
will be provided.
Some common questions when outsourcing:
1.    W hat is the data privacy and security of the vendor?
2.    W hat happens if the vendor files for bankruptcy?
3.    W hat is your data availability in a natural disaster?
4.    W here will your data be stored?
5.    W hat are the service reliability and compliance standards?
6.    Are backups tested for operational readiness?
7.    I s information commingled?
By being proactive the entity can mitigate potential problems encountered
by third-party vendors and service providers’ contracts and SLA’s.
A Risk Management Approach to Cyber
Risk management is a process whereby there is a formal plan in place to
assess and evaluate exposures to financial loss, protection of balance sheet,
and the development of recovery plans in the event that a loss does occur.
The steps in a risk management plan are:
1.    I dentify and assess the exposures facing the entity.
2.    E stablish loss levels in terms of financial both direct and indirect costs
of the exposures identified.
3.    E valuate various methods of handling the loss exposures; i.e. mitigate
the exposure, eliminate the exposure, transfer the exposure to a first party,
i.e., insurance.
4.    S elect and implement the best option.5.    C ontinually monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the option
selected.
During the risk assessment phase, information is classified such that all
categories of information assets are identified, both automated and non-
automated, i.e. payment information, personal customer information,
employee information, etc. Once classified, and knowledge of the assets
involved is known, it can be established what threats and vulnerabilities
exist to the entity that would cause a financial loss should these events occur.
Information assets can mean many things. It is important to identify where the
assets exist, and which vulnerability or threat may cause losses.
For intellectual property it is often helpful to also identify or categorize
the information assets as to the type of information being evaluated: for
example confidential versus nonconfidential information, restricted versus
nonrestricted, or public versus nonpublic. It is also helpful to have in place a
systematic approach to classifying the information itself. These policies and
procedures also form the basis upon which loss prevention and transference
can be evaluated as the information value changes over time.
There are a number of methods that an entity can develop in order to
quantify the value of measuring the risk of loss. One method is to establish an
acceptable risk level and an associate value for a given risk level. Therefore,
risk levels of high, medium, and low can be established with value levels for
high greater than $100,000, f or medium greater than $50,000 a nd for low less
than $50,000. By quantifying in financial terms, it becomes easy to determine
the entity’s propensity for risk. For a small entity, propensity for risk may
equate to a deductible, as the majority of exposures will be transferred
through various insurance mechanisms. For a large entity, these values may
be many times greater than the example.
Once it has been established which assets should be protected and at
what level, the entity is then able to evaluate the options for mitigating risks.
There are four standard opt ions:
1.    Accept the risk. The entity would choose to accept the risk if the value
of the asset is low and the threats/vulnerabilities are also low. Generally, in
this situation, the cost of using another method is greater than the acceptable
risk level.2.    Transfer the risk. Also known as sharing the risk. This method allows
the entity to transfer their exposure to risk to a third-party either partially or
totally. This is commonly done using traditional insurance where the
premiums paid represent the cost of transfer to the entity. Another example
for transfer is to find a third-party vendor who is willing or more capable
than the transferring entity to accept the risk of the activity. Examples would
be cloud computing, offsite storage, and web hosting.
3.    Limit the risk. Often times there is not a third-party to transfer the risk
to, or the activity is such that it is not possible to place it in the hands of a
third-party vendor. The cost of limiting the risk may be inexpensive, though
situations where automatic updates to systems or security patches are a part
of the software vendor’s services. Other times there may be significant costs
involved in limiting a risk; for example, providing redundancy and hot spot
facilities for recovery services due to the risk of natural disasters.
4.    Avoid the risk. Avoidance of risk requires the understanding that the
entity has decided that the risk of continuing the business activity is too great
of a threat for the financial stability of the business. Therefore, risk
avoidance means to no longer perform such risky activities. One way to
avoid network security issues is to disconnect the network from the
information highway.
The heavy lifting is now complete and only the choice of an option
remains. In general, implementation of a risk mitigation option is not
completed in a vacuum. It involves engaging the executive team the owner, or
the individual(s) responsible for taking the risk management
recommendation, and determining the best possible decision in light of the
information assets being protected. When actually implemented, for most
entities regardless of size, it is a combination of mitigation methods that are
employed in the plan’s execution. Often additional loss control
methodologies are employed to continually monitor and update the plan such
that the risk levels and methods for handling continue to meet the plan goals.
Conclusions and TrendsCybercrime is the new norm and possesses threats that are estimated to
divert 15-20 percent of the economic value of all internet and cyber
activities. This is a global war on crime and is not isolated to one country or
one economy. While states continue to address these cybercrimes from a
notification and regulation perspective, there is a mess of overlapping
jurisdictional issues and a general lack of consistency. The insurance sector
has for all intents and purposes announced that the commercial general
liability policy will no longer provide coverage or defense cost for most
anything cyber. As the new endorsements to the CGL policy reach the courts,
courts will likely side with the policy language and determine no coverage
exists for cyber events, as has been the trend.
A healthy sector within the industry is continuing to develop insurance
products addressing the various exposures to loss that modern technology has
created. While these are traditional insurance policies and a transfer of risk
for a known cost, there is much innovation going on to provide preventative
tools and resources to lessen the impact of intellectual property asset
management and security for informational data and privacy matters.
Individual insurers will continue to be innovative as greater knowledge is
gained as to the core risk characteristics and exposures. Thus, the future
direction will be toward mitigation of cyber exposures. Such tools as call
center services, notification systems and controls, as well as crisis
management resources will continue to be provided at the carrier level and
expanded.
The number of small business entities and other smaller organizations is
increasing each year. Cyber insurance products are currently available for
these entities. However, most products are in a stand-alone policy solution
and not offered through the normal or standard delivery systems. Producers
are not fully engaged in the selling of these cyber products. The challenge
facing the industry is to make these products available to the owners and
managers of these small concerns. Educating the insurance producer segment
on cyber exposures and the available coverages, whether in a separate policy
or an additional endorsement, will continue to slow the penetration of this
important and needed coverage for all types of insurance buyers.International coope ration and sharing of resources, skills, and
information exchange will accelerate at an alarming pace. Today’s cyber
threat is multi-national and therefore will require a multinational response to
curb, reduce, and eliminate the global threat to the personal and economic
security of the global community. Investor demands are increasing for more
information on the exposure to market value loss due to a cyber-breach event.
Both individual and institutional investors will want greater disclosure by
public companies of their managements’ assessment of the exposure to a
material risk of data breach. This pressure may cause the Security and
Exchange Commission to further the need for reporting in this critical area of
public company operations. (The chart in Appendix B lists state security
breach notification laws.)
Legal cost associated with data and security of networks will increase.
Are the courts going to align with the plaintiffs’ bar as the general public
continues to be frustrated with the size, cost and life changing events caused
by the inadequate protection given to personal and private information? Will
this frustration end in a flood of lawsuits? The indications are that it is on the
horizon.Cannabis and the CGL
SECTION V
By: Hannah E. Smith, Esq.
Introduction
The legalization of marijuana has long been a topic of debate. Propon ents
argue that it is non-addictive, less harmful than cigarettes and alcohol, and
that it relieves symptoms associated with debilitating medical conditions
such as nausea and pain, and in a manner safer than addictive prescription
drugs. Oppon ents claim that it is a gateway drug, it is more harmful than
tobacco products, damages the immune system, raises blood pressure, and
does not provide the beneficial relief of medical ailments as the propon ents
claim.
Is it Cannabis or Marijuana?
Cannabis is a family of plants, while marijuana is a primary species
within that plant family. Hemp is the other primary species within the
cannabis family. The main difference between marijuana and hemp is the
level of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) found within the plant. Marijuana
generally contains between 15 and 40 percent THC while hemp contains no
more than 0.3 percent of THC. The level of THC in hemp is too low to
induce a psychoactive effect in the user. Hemp also contains a substance
called cannabidiol, also known as CBD, which is used in thousands of
products for human and animal consumption, and is marketed for thetreatment of various ailments including anxiety, inflammation, sleeplessness,
and epilepsy.
History
As early as 2900 BCE, when Chinese Emperor Fu Hsi referenced
cannabis as popu lar medicine, cannabis has been referenced for medicinal
properties and has been used to treat a broad range of conditions including
muscle cramps, depression, epilepsy, and rheumatism. Because it is a fast
growing plant that is easy to cultivate and has many uses, the settlers in
Jamestown brought cannabis plants to North America in 1612. Throughout
the colonial period, hemp fiber was a very important export. Hemp was
valuable as a remedy, and as a strong fiber used for weaving heavy clothing
necessary for the cold winters. These early hemp plants had very low levels
of THC, but there is some evidence that ancient cultures knew about the
psychoactive properties of the plant, as strains were cultivated to produce
higher levels of THC, purportedly for religious ceremonies and healing
practices.
In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, cannabis, along with
opiates and cocaine, was freely available in drug form and as hashish, a
refined cannabis product. During this time, the demand for cannabis based
“medications” grew. It was marketed as an analgesic, an antispasmodic, and
a sedative. One pharmaceutical company marketed marijuana cigarettes as a
remedy for asthma. In 1906, the Pure Food and Drugs Act required
medication, including cannabis, to be labeled. The purpose of the act was to
prevent adulterated or poisonous foods  from entering the stream of
commerce.
The decade beginning in 1910 marked a largely prohibitionist sentiment
in America. In 1911, Massachusetts became the first state to outlaw cannabis.
In 1915, President Woodrow Wilson signed the Harrison Act. Although the
Harrison Act applied to cocaine, not marijuana, it became the model for drug
regulation on the federal level and is considered to have been the footing for
the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937.Between 1911 and 1927, twelve other states passed marijuana
prohibition laws. The list included Colorado, Nevada, Oregon, Washington,
and New York. By the end of 1936, all 48 states had enacted laws to regulate
marijuana. The decline in use of marijuana as medicine was hastened due to
the development of aspirin, morphine, and other opium-derived drugs.
The Marijuana Tax Act was the first federal U.S. law to criminalize
marijuana nationwide. The Marijuana Tax Act imposed an excise tax on the
sale, possession or transfer of all hemp products, the effect of which
basically criminalized all but industrial uses of the plant. The Act maintained
the right to use marijuana for medical purposes, but required physicians and
pharmacists who prescribed or dispensed marijuana to register with the
federal authorities, and pay an annual tax. With all of the new painkilling
drugs being developed, doctors generally decided it was easier to prescribe
something different than to deal with complying with all of the restrictions
imposed by the new law.
In 1951, Congress passed the Boggs Act, which established minimum
prison sentences for drug crimes, including two to five year minimum
sentences for first offences. The driving force behind the Boggs Act was a
mistaken belief that drug addiction was a contagious and potentially
incurable disease, and the addict should be quarantined and forced to
undergo treatment.
Marijuana was included in the Narcotics Control Act of 1956, resulting
in stricter mandatory sentences for marijuana-related offenses. As part of the
“War on Drugs”, the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 was signed into law
by President Richard Nixon. The Controlled Substances Act repealed the
Marijuana Tax Act, and placed all substances that were in some manner
regulated under existing federal law into one of five schedules. Marijuana
was as a Schedule I drug. The Controlled Substances Act based federal
scheduling on the following three criteria:
1.    M edical use
2.    P otential for abuse
3.    S afety or dependence liabilityA drug categorized as Schedule I has “no currently accepted medical use
and a high potential for abuse”, while Schedule V drugs have “lower
potential for abuse than Schedule IV and consist of preparations containing
limited quantities of certain narcotics”. Other Schedule I drugs include
heroin, LSD, and ecstasy, while examples of Schedule V drugs include
Robitussin, Motofen, and Lyrica.
Schedule

Potential
for Abuse

Accepted
Medical Use

Potential for Addiction

High

None

Drug is not safe to use even
under medical supervision

High

Medium

Yes. sometimes
with “severe
restrictions”

Abuse can cause severe
physical and mental
addiction

Abuse can cause severe
mental addiction, or
moderate physical addiction

Low

Abuse may lead to mild
mental or physical addiction

Lower than

Schedule IV | Yes

Abuse may lead to mild
mental or physical addiction

History of Legalization
Despite state and federal prohibitions, cannabis has consistently been a
popu lar recreational drug. Although there are dozens of anti-cannabis
organizations, both governmental and private-sector, marijuana use has
persisted and continues to hold a place in popu lar culture.
Jenks v. State of Florida was the first court ruling to highlight the
application of the “Medically Necessary” defense. The Florida First District
Court of Appeals said that in the case of medical marijuana the patient must
be suffering from a medically recognized disease or illness, which is causing
a symptom for which there is no effective treatment other than marijuana. The
case is Jenks v. State, 582 S o. 2d 676 ( Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1991) .California, in the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, became the first state
to legalize marijuana for medicinal use by patients with severe or chronic
illnesses. With this action, California became the frontrunner of a wave of
initially medical, but later recreational use, possession, distribution, and sale
of marijuana under state laws.
As of this writing, thirty-four states have legalized medicinal marijuana
for limited medical purposes, and five states have also legalized the
utilization of CBD oil for medicinal purposes. In 2012, Colorado and
Washington became the first two states to legalize recreational, or adult, use
of marijuana. As of May 2019, ten states and Washington D.C. have legalized
marijuana for recreational use, and eleven states have decriminalized
marijuana. Decriminalization generally means that small amounts meant for
personal consumption are a civil or local infraction, not a state crime. As
with any other term, the definition of personal consumption amounts varies
on a state-to-state basis. Decriminalization typically only deals with the
possession aspect of marijuana, while different legal penalties apply to the
distribution and sale of marijuana.
State laws vary greatly. In certain states, a patient must have one of
several specified debilitating or life-threatening conditions, such as cancer
or HIV, a patient must be at least twenty-one years old, and may only possess
a thirty-day supply. Many states restrict marijuana to be administered as a
liquid, oil or capsule, as oppos ed to smoking or eating the drug. Some states
prohibit home cultivation, while other states allow home cultivation of up to
a certain number of flowering cannabis plants. Other states have more lenient
marijuana laws, and allow legal use by individuals as young as age eighteen.
Even if a state has gone through the arduous process of legalization or
decriminalization, the possession of cannabis is still illegal under U.S.
federal law. The legal status of marijuana is a subject of ongoing and hotly
debated controversy. The federal illegality of the drug has prevented
necessary medical testing to determine the validity of claims that it is
harmful, harmless, or even beneficial to the user.
Due to the illegality of marijuana under federal law, the confusion and
potential criminal exposure reaches far beyond entities dealing directly with
the drug supply chain. The banking and insurance industries, and companiesproviding ancillary services, can also be implicated in hairy legal issues. So,
despite the growing popu larity and increasing state legality of the drug, many
industries have completely avoided doing business with anyone in the
marijuana supply chain. This lack of participation has made responsibly
starting a cannabis business much more difficult than predicted. In addition to
a potential violation of the Controlled Substances Act, an entity that does
business with any part of the cannabis industry can also be guilty of violating
other laws, including the Bank Secrecy Act and the Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations Act. If a bank or insurer decides to provide services
to the cannabis supply chain, they could find themselves criminally or civilly
liable for allegedly causing harm to others by aiding in the operation of a
federally illegal cannabis business.
The Supply Chain
Seed
Like all agricultural products, cannabis begins at the farming stage.
Cannabis farming looks a little different from conventional farming. In fact,
some states may call this stage “growing” or “cultivating.” Businesses
involved in this stage are completely focused on cultivating a high quality
cannabis plant. This type of growing operation can be executed either inside
or outside, with different risks and rewards accompanying each location.
This stage in the process is where many of the ancillary cannabis industry-
supporting companies become involved. In order to cultivate cannabis, the
grower must have appropriate lighting, greenhouse infrastructure, irrigation
systems, and fertilizer. The grower then harvests the plant and either
processes the plants themselves, or passes the raw materials on to a
wholesaler. The plant is then trimmed, dried, and cured before the plant can
become a finished product. Before each batch can be put out for sale, it has
to be assigned an identification number and sent in to the state for lab testing.
Although each state has different mandatory testing requirements, generally
the potency, the presence of pesticides, and the presence of foreign material
are all tested.Production
Next, the dried cannabis flower is transformed into finished products, a
process that can look very different depending on the end product. It can be
packaged into jars, or rolled into joints. The extraction can be turned into
vaporizers, topicals, or edibles. If the flower that was originally tested in the
previous step has been modified, that end product needs to go through further
testing. Most states require a sample product from each batch to be tested, the
results of which are linked to that batch in the seed-to-sale program. The
seed-to-sale program is a way to track the plant from beginning to end.
Because of the potency issues and the need for testing anytime the product
has been modified, it is important to know where the plant is and what stage
it is in at any given time.
Seed-to-Sale Software
Some states have implemented seed-to-sale tracking, which tracks state-
legalized cannabis. Seed-to-sale is found at cultivation sites, production
facilities, and dispensaries. The software is typically designed to integrate
with the software used in the laboratories, for testing, or with other software.
Seed-to-sale was designed with the goal to create a complete record of
transaction from the beginning of the growth process, to the lab, to the
producer, to the seller. Tracking helps keep companies accountable and in
compliance with the laws that accompany marijuana production due to its
Schedule I status. Seed-to-sale software also helps to ensure product safety,
ease the difficulty of a recall, and assist in an audit. The software can also
track theft, diversion, plant yields, client preferences, and financial statistics
for further analysis. Seed-to-sale software allows for enhanced traceability
and accountability, two things that are vital in an industry dealing with such
sought-after and pot entially dangerous goods .
Branding
The company that handles the production stage of the process will
sometimes also package, brand and sell the finished product to retailers.Sometimes, though, a cannabis producer will white-label their products.
White-labeling is when a brand buys finished, but un-branded products from
a producer company, and adds their own packaging and branding to give
customers what they will recognize in a dispensary.
Sale
Lastly is the sale. Whether the user is purchasing cannabis for
recreational or medical use, consumers can only legally purchase cannabis
from licensed retailers, often referred to as dispensaries. A cannabis retailer
may have issues finding vendors, as it is more difficult to find licensed
brands in the state where the dispensary is located. In order to remain
compliant with state laws, the dispensary must check licenses and lab testing
of all the brands they bring in for sale at their store. Retailers typically must
put their inventory in a seed-to-sale program to ensure that each item is
traceable.
CGL and Cannabis
Commercial general liability (CGL) insurance is a standard insurance
policy issued to businesses and organizations to protect them against liability
claims for bodily injury and property damage that arises out of premises,
operations, products, and completed operations. The CGL policy also covers
medical payments and limited medical expenses, regardless of fault. It also
covers personal and advertising injury due to defamation, slander, libel, or
infringement.
There are many coverage issues that arise with providing cannabis
insurance that are also standard for any commercial enterprise. The CGL
policy is important because it provides indemnity against the risks that nearly
all cannabis business owners face. It would protect business assets from
claims of bodily injury or property damage to third parties that occur on the
property or facilities. Since dispensaries are serving those who have
illnesses, it is paramount that the insured maintain clean and safe premises;doors that are easy to open, even floors, chairs that allow people with
movement issues to rise up out of them readily, and so forth. A CGL policy
covers non-professional negligent acts. For example, injuries that occur due
to a slip-and-fall accident will be covered by the CGL policy.
Like most retail stores, marijuana retail dispensaries also need CGL
coverage for any customer-related accidents or injuries that may occur on the
premises. Some states’ laws require distributors to carry and maintain CGL
insurance of no less than $2,000,000 in the aggregate and no less than
$1,000,000 f or each loss.
Although a CGL policy might be necessary for a cannabis business
owner, a standard CGL policy does not provide adequate protection for
certain aspects of that business. Like any food or manufacturing company,
product liability coverage needs to be insured on a separate policy. CGL
policies can contain exclusions for Schedule I substances, banned
substances, and other ingredients that are considered a health hazard.
The Policy
Coverage A of the CGL broadly grants coverage. In it, the insurer makes
promises to those who become insureds. That broad coverage is limited by
phrases such as “to which this insurance applies.” The insurance will cover
anything that falls within the insuring agreement that is not excluded later in
the policy.
Products Liability
Legal marijuana has been associated with some risks that may cause
bodily injury or property damage. Some of these risks include theft, motor
vehicle accidents, and consumption-related property damage or bodily
injuries. Since cannabis is just now gaining in legality there is potential for a
greatly increased number of court cases and product liability claims, with a
higher price tag than has been seen in the past. Marijuana has psychoactiveeffects, and the associated products will be represented by labeling and
marketing which could give rise to robust product liability litigation.
A manufacturer, distributor or retailer becomes liable if there is a defect
in the manufacture or design of a product which causes injury while the
product is being used in a reasonably foreseeable way. As is the nature of
cannabis, the customer purchases the product with the knowledge that the
product has an intoxicating effect. Obviously, there will be issues with edible
cannabis products. Everyone has heard at least one anecdote about a friend
who ate a marijuana brownie, thought it didn’t provide them with a
significant level of intoxication and ate another during a short period of time,
only to be way more intoxicated than they were anticipating. Although a
funny story, this is a serious issue for manufacturers. Many consumers do not
realize that cannabis may take significantly longer to have an effect on them if
eaten, as oppos ed to smoked. One small bite of an edible may equal a
standard dose of cannabis, so the result of just eating one cookie could put a
consumer far over their limit. These issues can still arise even if the labels
include appropriate warnings and clear instructions.
Issues have also arisen with the widespread use of vaporizers,
pesticides, mold and fungus contamination, breach of warranty,
misrepresentation, label claims and failure to warn, as well as customer
complaints from deceptive practices and bodily injury claims that result from
intoxication. The insurer will cover a claim stemming from any of these
“occurrences” that are covered by the CGL policy.
Cannabis Product Liability Lawsuits
Due to the prior country-wide illegality of marijuana, up until now there
has been very little judicial precedent for the risk issues that accompany
marijuana and in particular those that manufacture and sell in states where
cannabis is legalized have been facing. To date, there are only a few cases of
cannabis related product liability lawsuits.
One case that has been well-publicized was the Livwell case. It was
filed in Colorado in 2015 against Livwell, a company that owned ninedispensaries and at the time, one of the largest grow houses in Colorado.
Livwell used Eagle 20, a fungicide, to treat its marijuana plants during the
first quarter of 2015. The active ingredient in Eagle 20 is myclobutanil, a
dangerous chemical. Myclobutanil was listed as an ingredient in Livewell’s
cannabis products. The plaintiffs purchased and consumed the marijuana, but
claim that had they known about the myclobutanil, they would either not have
paid as much for the marijuana, or they would not have inhaled the drug. The
plaintiffs claim their damages as the difference between what they paid for
the marijuana, and what they would have actually paid if they had known that
there was myclobutanil in the product. This case was the beginning of
consumer safety litigation, and has given rise to the necessity of the states to
vigorously regulate pesticide, fungicide, and other chemical applications
used for cannabis. The case is Flores v. Livwell, Inc., 2016 Colo. Dist.
LEXIS 1658.
Another significant products liability case was brought against Gaia’s
Garden, an edible marijuana manufacturer. A customer, Richard Kirk,
consumed one of Gaia’s products and thereafter shot and killed his wife in an
alleged temporary insanity. The children of the couple alleged that the
product was improperly labeled, causing their father to consume much more
than the suggested limit, causing hallucinations. The complaint alleged strict
product liability among other claims. The next year, the insurer defending
Gaia’s Garden filed a complaint for declaratory judgment seeking a
determination of no obligation to indemnify under the policy on several
bases, including that the policy excluded liability arising from
“psychotrophic substances.”
The Pollution Exclusion
Although the ISO CGL policy contains an extensive exclusion for
pollution and pollution related occurrences the exclusion does allow for
some incidental exposures that could arise out of an insured’s business or
manufacturing operations by addressing them as exceptions to the exclusion.
According to the ISO CGL policy, the definition of a “pollutant” includes
“any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, includingsmoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste. Waste
includes materials to be recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.”
In its original plant form, cannabis would not meet this definition.
However, during cultivation, or when being processed as an edible, or while
being smoked, the product could well meet the definition of a “pollutant”.
Aside from the smoke that is produced as a byproduct of its consumption,
marijuana cultivation and processing requires a lot of energy, and can
produce a considerable amount of pollution in the process.
Marijuana pollution is an unsustainable byproduct of marijuana
cultivation, including high greenhouse gas emissions, irresponsible water
use, and fire hazards. As energy is used to power the light cultivation of
growing crops, greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane are
produced at a rate of two pounds of CO2 for each joint worth of marijuana.
Bodily injury or property damage arising out of the release of these gases and
methane would be subject to the pollution exclusion in the CGL. However,
there is an exception for bodily injury or property damage sustained in a
building if caused by release of gases, fumes or vapors from materials
brought into the building in connection with operations performed by the
insured or on the insured’s behalf by a contractor or subcontractor.
One possible area where the pollution exclusion would apply to bar
coverage is for exposure to what is commonly known as “light pollution”.
During cultivation, the plants have different stages and require precise
lighting cycles, with the largest area in greenhouses reserved for plants
requiring twelve hours of sunlight and twelve hours of darkness. At one stage
of growth, a plant might thrive best with eighteen hours of light. If the sun
doesn’t provide adequate light, cultivators use artificial lights, or “grow
lights”. Artificial lights are often on at times that are normally dark and can
be brighter than moonlight, resulting in a brightly lit night sky referred to as
light pollution. The consequences of light pollution go beyond just not being
able to see the stars. It can have serious ecological consequences, and
studies suggest that it has adverse health effects on humans. For humans, it
throws off our circadian rhythm, our (roughly) twenty-four-hour clock
sleep/wake cycle. Some studies have shown that this disruption is linked to
obesity, diabetes and heart disease; and some studies suggest a moderateincrease in the risk of breast cancer among nurses who are exposed to light at
night due to shift work.
Further, cultivators in more rural areas may use large diesel engines for
power, often shoddy  and homemade, which are huge risks for fires and
environmental spills. The spills, as well as the release of toxic pesticides
used to treat blight, mold, and diseases, wash into rivers and creeks,
resulting in a true pollution exposure that would not be covered by the CGL.
An exception to the pollution exclusion however, would provide
coverage if bodily injury or property damage arose out of heat, smoke or
fumes from a hostile fire; or if bodily injury sustained within a building was
caused by smoke, fumes, vapor or soot produced by or originating from
equipment used to heat, cool or dehumidify the building.
N. Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property
The ISO CGL policy contains an exclusion for product recall.
n.    R ecall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property
Damages claimed for any loss, cost or expense incurred by you
or others for the loss of use, withdrawal, recall, inspection,
repair, replacement, adjustment, removal or disposal of:
(1)    “Your product”;
(2)    “Your work”; or
(3)    “Impaired property”;
If such product, work, or property is withdrawn or recalled from
the market or from use by any person or organization because of
a known or suspected defect, deficiency, inadequacy, or
dangerous condition in it.
There have been hundreds of marijuana recalls in the last several years
since the legalization began. These recalls have largely been executed due to
labeling errors, mold or contamination. Recalls have also occurred due to the
use of certain toxic fungicides. One California recall in particular occurredin late 2018. Tens of thousands of pounds of marijuana and other products
were recalled after a Sacramento laboratory was caught faking pesticide test
results. The lab had been falsely marking twenty-two pesticides “undetected”
after the discovery that their lab equipment was unable to detect and measure
the harmful substances at the miniscule levels that the state regulations
required. This resulted in the recall of tens of millions of dollars-worth of
cannabis product. Due to the recall exclusion, the fall-out from this failure to
adequately test falls completely on the shoulders of the insured.
Although damages incurred due to a recall are not covered by the CGL
policy, the cannabis industry views these recalls as a sign that their oversight
of cannabis production is working, and that the industry can ensure a
consistent quality product while protecting the health and safety of
consumers.
Personal and Advertising Injury
One of the issues with cannabis is that there are many claims and
anecdotal stories about what benefits it has for a wide variety of conditions,
but there is very little testing that supports this. The lack of testing is mainly
due to the federally illegal nature of the substance, which has rendered it
very difficult to achieve any medical certainty about the drug. This makes the
labeling and advertising of the product something that must be done carefully.
As always, there are exclusions in the CGL for personal and advertising
injuries, including intentional detainment, maligning the competition with
false claims, and other activities committed despite the insureds knowledge
of their falsity, but the CGL policy provides coverage for some of these
actions. Most dispensaries are locked facilities, and the patient is only
allowed in certain areas of the store. If a patient with some psychological
issues refuses to leave and the insured has to have the patient removed, a
claim could evolve claiming wrongful eviction even though the insured was
correct in his actions. This would be covered under the personal and
advertising coverage. Likewise, if the insured’s picture of a marijuana is too
similar to a competitor’s picture, and the insured created the ad not realizing
the similarity of the pictures, the policy would defend.Conclusion
Over the last ten years the marijuana industry has experienced explosive
growth. More than two-thirds of states have legalized some form of cannabis,
ranging from strictly regulated medicinal marijuana to slightly less strict
recreational marijuana. Despite this boom , insuring cannabis related
businesses can be very complicated. Because marijuana has been and
remains federally illegal, and due to the lack of testing and experimentation
on the substance, there are many legal uncertainties, unique hazards, and
emerging risks involved in marijuana insurance. As with any type of
insurance, the CGL policy must be carefully scrutinized to determine the
scope of coverage and any applicable exclusions to determine when there
may be coverage for marijuana exposures.Mass Violence Incidents and the
CGL
SECTION VI
By: Hannah E. Smith, Esq.
Introduction
Generally, mass violence incidents are human-caused tragedies that can
impact not only individuals and families, but whole communities, the entire
country, and even the world. These types of disasters include shootings,
bombings, car and plane hijacking, and acts of terrorism. Names like
Mandalay Bay, Sandyhook, Pulse Nightclub, Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School, the Boston Marathon Bombing, and 9/11 are unfortunately
widely known due to the devastating tragedies that are now associated with
the titles. These tragedies received both national and international attention.
As demonstrated with the incidents mentioned above , mass violence events
can occur without warning and can happen anywhere. Due to the ability to
swiftly cause massive amounts of damage using a firearm, gun violence and
mass shootings make up the vast majority of the mass violence events in the
United States. Although there are instances where bombs or cars are used to
cause a massive amount of destruction, firearms seem to be the weapon of
choice for criminals seeking to cause a great amount of harm in a small
amount of time. Because of this, statistics and analysis are often geared
toward gun violence and do not include other violent events. With the recent
rash of shooting incidents across the country and more than 50 percent of
these tragic events occurring either in commerce, government or educationalenvironments, an understanding of how the Commercial General Liability
(CGL) policy applies is now more important than ever.
Definition of Mass Violence Incidents
There does not seem to be a universal definition of mass violence events
or mass killings. The lack of a definition can complicate the general
understanding of mass violence, and especially mass shooting trends. Many
agencies and organizations record and publish information on mass violence
events, a task which can become extremely complicated due to the lack of a
definition. Most agencies and organizations tend to use a different definition
to describe these horrible events. Some definitions solely focus on death toll,
while others count crimes in which there are few deaths but several injuries.
Some definitions focus on the method used to cause violence, while other
definitions include crimes perpetrated using any weapon. Other definitions
highlight the motive of the perpetrator while still others focus on who
specifically was attacked, for example, the motive to kill strangers as
oppos ed to targeting a specific type of people. Some definitions do not
include shootings that stem from domestic and gang violence, because those
types of shootings are contextually distinct from high-fatality indiscriminate
public venue murders.
In 2005 the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) classified a mass
murderer as murdering four or more people, not including the killer(s),
during an event with no “cooling-off” period between the murders, and
typically occurring in a single location where one or more people kills
several others. The FBI’s categorization comes with controversy though,
because it does not include incidents in which fewer than four victims are
killed but several other victims are severely injured. After the 2012
Sandyhook shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, Congress defined “mass
killings” to mean “three or more killings in a single incident.”
The definition of a mass violence event is very important. Depending on
the leniency or severity of the definition used by the data source being
referenced, the number of mass violence events in the US per year can
widely range from single digits up to multiple hundreds. Some of the morerestrictive definitions do not include domestic violence and criminal activity
and so rule out about 80 percent of the mass shooting incidents with four or
more victim fatalities.
A restrictive definition would include public mass shooting events, such
as the 2017 Las Vegas, Nevada, Mandalay Bay shooting where fifty-nine
were killed and 422 people were injured, and would also include the 2018
Annapolis, Maryland Capital Gazette shooting, resulting in five victim
fatalities, and two injuries, but exclude the 2018 Cincinnati, Ohio Fifth-
Third shooting, an incident where four people, including the gunman, were
killed and two more were injured, because the gunman is not included as a
victim fatality. Despite the fact that the last two examples are similar, and
both shocking, upsetting and terrifying, only one is considered a mass
violence event according to popu lar definitions.
Broader definitions provide a more realistic picture of gun violence in
America, but may not provide a true depiction of the circumstances to which
gun policy would apply. For example, if firearm policy only affected public
mass shooting incidents, a definition and resulting analysis that includes
domestic and gang violence shootings may appear to indicate that gun policy
would have a more widespread effect than it truly would.
Although we don’t yet have a universal definition of a mass violence
event, each varying definition does serve a purpose. These events are so
unpredictable on every level that it is difficult to fit them all into a box that
fits the needs of adequately describing them. The ambiguity in describing and
counting these events, though, may result in increased media coverage that
influences the public perception of mass violence events without increasing
the public understanding of the prevalence, social costs, policy implications,
and trends of these incidents.
CGL in General
CGL insurance covers third-party lawsuits that stem from property
damage and any loss of use, bodily injuries and related medical costs,
operational costs, product liability, and certain legal expenses. How does theISO CGL policy apply to intentional acts or to deliberate harm or to bodily
injury or property damage that is expected? Although the facts of each
scenario may change the outcome, and different jurisdictions interpret the
same words differently, answering the above  questions will help to
determine if coverage exists under the CGL.
According to the policy language and the states’ public policies against
permitting insurance that covers the insureds own violent actions, the CGL
will not provide coverage for harm caused intentionally by the insured.
Legal Liability After a Mass Violent Event
A big question when discussing mass violent events becomes who might
be liable after an event occurs. We have seen public shootings, school
shootings, marathon bombings, vehicles driven into crowds of people, plane
hijackings, the list goes on and on. The list of potential defendants in a
lawsuit is vast. Victims and their families can file lawsuits against the
property owner where the incident took place, the person in charge of the
property i.e. an active manager, school superintendent or principal, the
parents or people legally responsible for an underage shooter, the entity that
provided the weapon to the attacker, the police and sheriff’s offices, or the
city where the event occurred, and the ruling local government. After the
Mandalay Bay shooting in Las Vegas, family members of victims of that
attack even sued the security agency that trained the shooter in firearms
during his work as a security guard. Not many of these lawsuits are fruitful
for the plaintiffs, but they can still be overwhelmingly expensive for
defendants, even if they are just paying out court and attorney’s fees.
The Protection of Lawful Commerce In Arms Act, or PLCAA, codified at
15 U.S.C. §§ 7901- 7903 provides immunity to gun manufacturers and dealers
from being held liable when crimes have been committed using their
products. The PLCAA, however, does not protect dealers and manufacturers
from liability for damages resulting from defective products, breach of
contract, criminal misconduct, and other actions for which they are held
directly responsible. In the years before the Act was passed in 2005, victims
of firearm violence in the United States had successfully sued bothmanufacturers and dealers of firearms for negligence on grounds that the
defendants should have foreseen that their products could be diverted and
ultimately used in a crime. Since the passage of the Act, there have been two
cases taken to a jury trial for damages. In one, the jury found in favor of the
gun store after a gun purchased at the store was used in a murder. The second
ended in a verdict against a gun retailer after guns negligently sold there
were used to shoot police officers. In October of 2016, a Connecticut
Superior Court judge dismissed a lawsuit that was filed by some of the
families of the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, against gun
manufacturer Remington, the wholesale distributor, as well as the retailer
who sold the semi-automatic rifle used in the shooting. The judge, in that
case, decided that the claims fell squarely within the immunity provided to
firearm manufacturers and dealers by the PLCAA. However, on March 14th
2019, the Connecticut Supreme Court reversed that ruling and allowed the
victims’ families to continue their suit against Remington.
Almost anyone involved in the design, production, sale, supervision, and
security of a firearm can be implicated in a lawsuit. This can be an issue for
insurers who provide CGL insurance to various businesses, including
firearm retailers, and even normal businesses that don’t have anything to do
with firearms. For example, if an insured owns a bar but fails to post the
appropriate signage stating that firearms are prohibited within the liquor
establishment, and a shooting occurs inside the bar, that insured could be
found negligent for failing to post the appropriate warnings, and therefore
sued by the victim or the family of the victim requiring the insurer of the CGL
policy to respond.
Objective or Subjective Standard
In order to determine whether the injury or damage was expected or
intended from the standpoint of the insured, either a standard of subjectivity
or objectivity can be applied. When considering a subjective standard, the
actual intent, or the expectation of the insured is the main consideration in
determining if the damage or injury was expected or intended. The objective
standard determines whether the insured intended or expected the injury, notfrom the viewpoint of the insured, but instead from the viewpoint of a
“reasonably objective person”, or a similar person in the same
circumstances. The argument hinges on whether a reasonably objective
person in the same circumstances would have intended or expected the injury
or damages. The objective standard seems to be the most advantageous from
an insurer standpoint, but the language of Exclusion A of the ISO CGL states:
a.    Expected or Intended Injury
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” expected or intended from the
standpoint of the insured.
So, with the ISO CGL, a subjective standard should be used.
Expected or Intended Injury Exclusion
Digging a little deeper into the expected or intended injury exclusion, the
ISO CGL does not define the term “expected”. When a term is left undefined
in a policy, the courts give that term its plain and ordinary meaning.
Generally, that means the desk reference dictionary definition. Merriam
Webster defines “expect” as
1.    t o consider probable or certain
a: to consider reasonable, due, or necessary
b: to consider bound in duty or obligated
2.    t o anticipate or look forward to the coming or occurrence of.
The different definitions from Merriam Webster indicate that the term
“expect” can have more than one distinct unambiguous meaning. 1.a indicates
that the outcome is more likely to result than not, while 2. speaks to an
anticipation that the result will occur. As described by the court in State
Farm Lloyd’s v. Jones, using the dictionary definition above  of “expect’
”waiting for a result, particularly one that is “intended” or “certain” to occurwould be to interpret “expected” to mean “intended.” The court, therefore,
determined that “a result. . . is ‘expected’. . . if the insured considered its
occurrence to be more likely to happen than not to happen.” Thus, using the
dictionary definition of “expect” becomes problematic. The case is State
Farm Lloyd’s v. Jones No. 4:05-cv-389, 2008 U.S. Dist. (E.D. Tex. Dec. 30,
2008) .
So when there are issues like the one depicted above , the court will also
look at the surrounding language to determine how to construe undefined
insurance policy terms. In Bay State Ins. Co. v. Wilson, the Supreme Court of
Illinois noted that the terms “intended” or “expected” must have different
meanings or there would be no point in having both terms in the one
exclusion. (Bay State Ins. Co. v. Wilson, 451 N .E. 2d 990, 992 ( Ill. 1983) ).
Although some courts may disagree, the policy language clearly uses two
different terms. Because of this, we can assume that the two terms have two
different meanings, so expected injury and intended injury are two different
things. Courts have defined expected injury as injury that is “more likely than
not to occur” “reasonably anticipated,” “practically certain” and
“substantially probably.” Courts have thus far failed to analyze whether or
under what circumstances a subjectively certain expectation of some definite
probability of an adverse outcome might fall within the policy exclusion for
expected injury. The courts do seem to agree that the insured’s subjective
expectations govern the interpretation of the situation unless those
expectations are absurd and unrealistic so as they cannot be taken seriously.
(Jenkins v. Koester, 2007 M ich. App. (Ct. App. A ug. 28, 2007) ).
From the Standpoint of the Insured
As discussed above , when discussing mass violent events, there are a
few entities who can be the insureds of incident, including the property
owner where an incident takes place, the person in charge of the property, the
parents or legal guardians of an underage assailant, the entity that provided
the weapon to the attacker, the police and sheriffs offices, or the city where
the event occurred along with the ruling local government. The applicable
policy language in Exclusion a. is focused on whether the injury is expectedor intended, and the view of that expectation or intent is “from the standpoint
of the insured” that is alleged to be liable for that bodily injury or property
damage. For this exclusion to apply to preclude coverage, the insurer must
demonstrate that the resulting injury was expected or intended by the insured,
not that the action that the insured took was intentional. Referencing an
earlier example, if the insured is the owner of a bar and fails to post the
appropriate signage notifying patrons that firearms are prohibited in that
liquor establishment, and a shooting occurs, does that failure to post signage
constitute an act so negligent such that a shooting would be expected or
intended from the standpoint of the insured? Alternatively, if all appropriate
signage was posted and the insured took necessary precautions to prevent
injuries from firearms in their bar, but one patron still shoots another in a
heated argument, that injury is not expected or intended from the standpoint of
the insured, so the policy would respond to that injury.
Workers Compensation and Similar Laws
Exclusion
Statistics about workplace violence are startling. Violent acts can occur
at any time and in basically any place of business. In the United States alone
in the last few years, there have been examples of individual incidents, to
large-scale events. Exclusion d. in the ISO CGL precludes coverage for
“any obligation of the insured under a workers’ compensation, disability
benefits or unemployment compensation law or any similar law.”
Workers’ compensation insurance generally covers the medical expenses
and related costs when an employee is injured while on the job. Incidents of
workplace violence typically fall under workers’ compensation coverage.
As with any insurance coverage, workers’ compensation policies have
limitations and reasoning as to why an affected employee may not be covered
under the policy. Not all workplace injuries are covered, so employees may
not receive benefits in certain situations. Some states require injured
employees to prove that they received their injuries as a direct result of risks
experienced within the scope of employment, and even then they may bedenied coverage. Not all workplace violence is covered, though. If a fight
occurs between two employees that are in a personal relationship, resulting
injuries will likely be excluded from workers’ compensation coverage.
So, although the CGL precludes coverage for workplace violent events,
there is coverage provided under the workers’ compensation insurance that
the employer should have in place.
War Exclusion
Exclusion i. in the CGL is known as the war exclusion, and precludes
coverage for:
i.    W ar
“Bodily injury” or “property damage”, however caused, arising, directly
or indirectly, out of:
(1)    War, including undeclared or civil war;
(2)    Warlike action by a military force, including action in hindering
or defending against an actual or expected attack, by any
government, sovereign or other authority using military personnel
or other agents; or
(3)    Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped pow er, or action
taken by governmental authority in hindering or defending against
any of these.
The war exclusion went through a change under the 2004 version of the
CGL form. Previously there were restrictions to the exclusion, preventing the
exclusion from applying to any liability that was not assumed under a
contract or agreement. The exclusion now applies to warlike action by a
military force, by any government, or by other authority using military
personnel or other agents. A primary example of this is the attack on the
World Trade Center, which was a warlike action taken by a military force orby some other authority using agents other than military personnel. Due to the
high loss of life and the extraordinary amount of property damage caused by
those terrorist attacks, such actions were deemed to be a risk exposure
beyond the scope of a standard general policy liability policy, which is why
the CGL includes it as an exclusion.
Conclusion
As is the nature of insurance, a person does not know they need a certain
type of coverage until a loss occurs, at which point it is too late to procure
coverage. To an extreme, this is also the nature of mass violent events.
Business owners, school districts, property managers, and local governments
will likely assume that they don’t need to procure insurance coverage for
mass violent events until after an incident occurs. As mass violence incidents
in the United States increases, business owners, property owners, and
countless others need to consider what insurance coverage is necessary to
compensate victims and their families after an event occurs. Although the
CGL policy will likely provide some coverage for the losses incurred during
and after a mass violence event, it will not provide all of the coverage
necessary to indemnify the victims and their families completely. Insureds
should consider taking out violent events coverage, and insurers could
consider expanding their coverage to violent events.Appendices
Appendix A: ISO Forms
Form NameForm
No.Page
Commercial General Liability
Coverage FormCG 00 01 04
13211
Additional Insured–Owners,
Lessees or Contractors–
Scheduled Person or
OrganizationCG 20 10 04
13227
Additional Insured–Owners,
Lessees or Contractors–
Completed OperationsCG 20 37 04
13229
Additional Insured–Owners,
Lessees or Contractors–
Automatic Status When
Required in Construction
Agreement with YouCG 20 33 04
13230Amendment of Insured
Contract DefinitionCG 24 26 04
13232
Primary and
Noncontributory–Other
Insurance ConditionCG 20 01 04
13233
Year 2000 Computer-Related
and Other Electronic
Problems–Limited Coverage
OptionsCG 04 31 09
98234
Exclusion–Violation of
Statutes that Govern E-mails,
Fax, Phone Calls or Other
Methods of Sending Material
or InformationCG 00 67 03
05236
Exclusion–Access or
Disclosure of Confidential or
Personal Information and
Data-Related Liability–With
Limited Bodily Injury
ExceptionCG 21 06 05
14237
Exclusion–Access or
Disclosure of Confidential or
Personal Information and
Data-Related Liability–LimitedCG 21 07 05
14238Bodily Injury Exception Not
Included
Exclusion–Access or
Disclosure of Confidential or
Personal Information
(Coverage B Only)CG 21 08 05
14239
Commercial Cyber Insurance
PolicyCY 00 01 01
18240
Information Security
Protection PolicyEC 00 10 01
14253
Media and Information
Security Protection PolicyEC 00 12 01
14266
Media and Information
Security Protection PolicyEC 00 13 01
14280
Amend Defense and
Settlement ProvisionEC 20 09 01
14294
Payment Card Industry
(PCI)–Provide Coverage for
Defense Expenses and Fines
or PenaltiesEC 20 12 01
14295
Computer and Funds TransferEC 20 13 01296Fraud 14
Computer FraudEC 20 14 01
14298
Telephone Toll FraudEC 20 15 01
14300
Appendix B: The Status of Data Breach
Notification Laws in the United States303
Appendix C: NAIC – Insurance Data
Security Model Law307
Appendix D: Cannabis State-by-State Basis325ISO Forms
APPENDIX AThe Status of Data Breach
Notification Laws in the United
States
APPENDIX B
“In today’s environment, it’s not a matter of if a data breach will occur,
but when it will occur, and how well you respond. Do everything you can to
prevent data breaches, but also fully plan out how you will respond if you
are breached. Today’s media and business environment demands that two-
pronged approach,” advises Brian Lapidus, Chief Operating Officer of Kroll
Fraud Solutions. The warning is clear: companies wanting to protect their
money and their credit need to have a data breach response plan in place
be f or e it becomes necessary. As they say, “a good offense is a good
defense.”
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to prepare your business for this
eventuality, as evidenced by the disarray of state notification laws.
Therefore, you should tailor your response plan to the unique laws of your
state and the unique assets of your business.
To find your state’s data breach notification statute, as well as its most
recent amendment and effective date, consult the following chart:
This summary is intended to provide general information about
applicable laws, and does not constitute legal advice regarding specific facts
or circumstances.NAIC – Insurance Data Security
Model Law
APPENDIX CCannabis State-by-State Basis
APPENDIX D
Due to the federally illegal status of cannabis in the United States, there
has been a widespread hesitation on the part of the states to legalize for
medicinal and recreational purposes. After the first state legalized, the
floodg ates opened for other states to begin the legalization. The chart below
represents the legalization status of cannabis on a state-by-state basis.
Consult the chart below to find your state’s cannabis legalization status.
This summary is intended to provide general information about
applicable laws, and does not constitute legal advice regarding specific facts
or circumstances.Index
         
1973 C omprehensive General Liability policy form.......... 7, 16, 28, 32, 36,
39, 46, 81, 85, 86, 112
1986 C GL policy form.......... 16, 28, 32, 33, 36, 39, 85, 168
Absolute exclusion.......... 175
Accident.......... 1, 2, 9-10, 11, 12, 17, 21, 25, 41, 46, 47, 51-52, 53, 54, 60-
61, 63, 70, 81, 82, 86, 87, 91, 92, 103, 104, 105, 109, 111, 112, 113,
126, 134,143, 146, 149-150
“Accident” forms.......... 86
Additional insured endorsements.......... 2, 46-47, 48-51, 52, 55, 56, 58, 59,
60, 62, 63, 64, 76, 77, 78
Additional insured form (2004) .......... 57
Additional insured provisions.......... 56, 60, 61
Additional insured status.......... 45, 48, 50, 51, 54, 60, 63, 74, 75, 76
Additional insured(s).......... 49, 58
Additional insureds and contractual liability.......... 51-64
Additional insureds and defense costs.......... 70-73
Advertisement.......... 73
( de f i ne d).......... 173
Advertising injury coverage.......... 171-172
Advertising injury.......... 58, 172-173, 174, 176
Aggregate limit.......... 32, 60, 85, 86, 95, 113, 124, 133, 143, 152
Aggregate(s).......... 85
Alienated premises exclusion.......... 16, 18
All sums.......... 88, 90, 91, 110, 117
Annualization.......... 94-95
Anti-indemnity statutes.......... 58, 66
Anti-stacking terms.......... 89
Applicability of the CGL policy to cyber risk exposures.......... 168-169Applications software.......... 5, 170, 174, 176
Arising out of language.......... 47, 48, 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 60
Asbestos cases, case law examples.......... 30, 8, 88, 89, 110, 145-146
Asbestos cases finding multiple occurrences.......... 146-152
Asbestos cases finding one occurrence.......... 145
Asbestos claims.......... 84, 85, 90, 93, 144-155
Assume the tort liability of another.......... 64, 65, 68
Batch clauses.......... 91-93
Blanket additional insured endorsement(s).......... 47, 56
Blanket basis.......... 47, 56
Bodily injury or property damage.......... 3, 32, 48, 49, 51, 61, 64, 65, 67, 71,
80, 81, 85, 88, 92, 95, 96, 98, 155
Breach of contract.......... 9, 10, 11, 15, 26, 29, 33, 41, 62, 71, 127
Broad form property damage endorsement.......... 16
Broadcasting.......... 172, 173
Burden of proof issues.......... 101
Business income and extra expense.......... 178, 182
Business risk doctrine and the business risk exclusions.......... 1-44
CAN-SPAM Act (2003) .......... 174, 175
Cannabis and
personal and advertising injury.......... 199
pollution exclusion.......... 197
products liability.......... 195
Recall of products, work, or impaired property.......... 198
Care, custody, or control.......... 16, 19
Case law survey.......... 111
Cases in which disputes arise.......... 96
Cause test, the.......... 98
“Caused by”.......... 65
Caused by the policyholder’s acts or omissions.......... 47
Certificate of insurance.......... 73-77
Combined single limits.......... 95
Completed ope rations.......... 82, 85, 143
Completed ope rations or products hazards aggregates.......... 85, 142
Complex underwriting.......... 179
Computer-targeted crimes.......... 158
Conclusions and trends.......... 187Conditions language.......... 83, 84, 100, 132, 134, 147, 152
Construction defect and building claims, case law survey.......... 114
Continuous injury trigger.......... 154
Continuous or repeated exposure.......... 9, 81, 82, 83, 84, 87, 91, 92, 100,
116, 121, 123, 132, 134, 152, 154, 155
Contract.......... 3-4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 21, 22, 24, 25 26, 29, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 40, 41, 43, 45, 46, 47-48, 50-51, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59-60, 61, 62,
63, 64-65, 87, 115, 117, 122, 127, 138, 160, 184
Contracting party.......... 61, 70, 73, 76
Contractual indemnity wording.......... 66
Contractual liability coverage.......... 45-78
Contractual obligations.......... 3, 45
Contractual liability issues.......... 64
Contractual risk-shifting common.......... 47
Correlation of U.S. cybersecurity expenditure to detected events.......... 162
a change of culture.......... 167
direct cost.......... 164
everybody  is a publisher.......... 167
indirect cost.......... 164
oppor tunity cost.......... 164
Coverage availability.......... 48, 104, 180
Coverage limits in primary policies.......... 60
Coverage territory.......... 169
( de f i ne d).......... 169
Cybercrime in the United States.......... 160
Cyber liability.......... 157
Damage to impaired property or property not physically injured.......... 35-38
Damages.......... 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14, 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 34, 35, 37, 39, 40,
42, 43, 50, 61, 62, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72, 79, 80, 82, 87, 91, 113, 117, 118,
122, 127, 135, 143, 157, 166, 169, 170, 174, 176
Data breach.......... 159, 163-167, 175, 177, 184, 188
Data breach notification laws in the United States..........A ppendix B
Deductibles and self-insured retentions (SIRs).......... 105
Deemer clauses.......... 89
Defective product.......... 7, 41, 42, 62, 100, 114, 116, 136, 140, 143
Defectively designed, product.......... 136
Defense and indemnity payments.......... 51Defense costs.......... 34, 51, 66-67, 70, 97
Difference between additional insured and contractual liability
coverage.......... 51, 70
Diminution of value.......... 5
Directly or indirectly.......... 15, 22, 174
Disclaimers on certificate.......... 76
Discrimination claims, case law survey.......... 117
Distribution of material in violation of statutes.......... 173, 174
Diverse claimants.......... 97
Domain name.......... 173
Duty of good f aith.......... 127
Duty to defend.......... 8, 9, 14, 33, 34, 53, 55, 71, 79, 80, 81, 82, 130, 156
Each child, new occurrence.......... 131
Economic losses.......... 6, 14, 36
Effect test, the.......... 98
Electronic chatrooms or bulletin boards.......... 173
Electronic data.......... 5, 170, 17,173, 174, 176, 177, 178, 181
( de f i ne d).......... 173
Employment.......... 86, 117, 129
discrimination.......... 117, 118
Endorsement, CG 21 06 05 14.......... 175
Endorsement, CG 21 07 05 14.......... 177
Environmental insurance coverage cases.......... 17
Environmental liability claims.......... 119
Errors and om issions.......... 118, 181
Event test, the.......... 98, 148
Exclusion j.–Damage to property.......... 2, 15-27, 33
Exclusion j.(1)–“Owned Property” exclusion.......... 16-17
Exclusion j.(2)–“Alienated Premises” exclusion.......... 17
Exclusion j.(3) and (4)–“Care, Custody, or Control” exclusion.......... 19-
22
Exclusion j.(5)–“Performing Operations” exclusion.......... 22-24
Exclusion j.(6)–“Faulty Workmanship” exclusion.......... 24-27
Exclusion k.–Damage to “Your Product”.......... 2, 27-31, 36
Exclusion l.–Damage to “Your Work”.......... 2, 31-35
Exclusion m.–Damage to Impaired Property or Property Not Physically
Injured.......... 2, 35-39Exclusion n........... 2, 39-42
Exclusion p........... 173
Exclusive control.......... 21
Exploitation crimes.......... 159
Exposure and triple trigger.......... 87
Exterior Insulation Finish Systems (EIFS).......... 34, 35
External factors impacting occurrence determinations.......... 102
Extortion threats.......... 178, 181
Failing to add an additional insured.......... 73
Failure to warn.......... 83, 114, 139, 146, 148, 151
Fair notice.......... 69-70
Faulty work.......... 3, 12, 43
Faulty workmanship exclusion.......... 24-26
Financial crimes.......... 158, 159
First encounter trigger.......... 129
Food poi soning claims, case law survey.......... 113
Forms..........A ppendix A
Fortuity.......... 10, 11
Fortuitous losses.......... 12
Gaps in coverage.......... 46, 72, 73
General aggregate limit.......... 32, 95
General contractor.......... 3, 21, 22, 26, 28, 30, 34, 35, 38, 45, 47, 48, 50,
51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 76
Guideline cases.......... 118
Hearing loss claims.......... 152
Hold harmless indemnity clauses.......... 66
Hold harmless wording and defense costs.......... 66
Horizontal exhaustion.......... 107, 154
Housing discrimination.......... 117
Identity of claimants.......... 120
Imminent threat.......... 17
“Impaired property” exclusion
( de f i ne d).......... 36-38
Indemnification/hold harmless clauses.......... 71
Indemnity.......... 34, 45, 50, 51, 52, 57, 58, 62, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 76-77,
80, 81, 82, 86, 88, 95, 96, 97, 98, 104, 107, 108, 109, 110, 123, 132, 181
( de f i ne d).......... 34Indemnity assumed in insured contract.......... 69
Indemnity limits.......... 82, 88, 97, 104, 110
Indemnity provisions.......... 66, 69
In whole or in part, wording.......... 2, 5, 47-48, 49, 58, 64, 65-66, 90, 94
Insurance company review of contracts.......... 72
Insurance forms..........A ppendix A
Insurance Services Office (ISO).......... 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 57, 58, 59, 60, 94,
180
Insured contract(s).......... 64-66
( de f i ne d).......... 64
Insured versus insurer.......... 95
Insurer insolvency.......... 109
Insurer versus insurer.......... 96
Insurer versus reinsurer.......... 96
Insuring agreement, the.......... 1, 4, 9, 13, 14, 178
Intangible.......... 6, 7, 164, 168
Intellectual property claims.......... 157, 160, 182, 184
Intentional injury exclusion.......... 72
Lead paint claims.......... 152-153
Legal cause.......... 97-99
Legal tests for counting occurrences.......... 96-97
Level of care.......... 63
“Limited access”.......... 21
Limits of liability.......... 29, 61, 85, 94, 99, 108
contractual.......... 85
operations.......... 85
products.......... 85
protective.......... 85
Limiting coverage.......... 59, 78
Litigation expenses.......... 67
Loaned property.......... 19
Loss of use.......... 5, 8, 22, 36, 39, 85, 115, 168, 172, 174
Low indemnity limits.......... 102-108
Malware.......... 155-156, 164
Manifestation or actual injury.......... 80
Manufacturing and design claims.......... 91
Manuscript endorsements.......... 64, 72Marijuana.......... 189
Mass violence events and expected or intended injury.......... 205
legal liability.......... 203
objective standard.......... 204
subjective standard.......... 204
war exclusion.......... 207
workers compensation.......... 206
Metatag.......... 171
Molestation and sexual assault claims.......... 127-131
each child a new occurrence.......... 129-130
impact of aggregating provisions.......... 130
multiple locations or perpetrators as separate occurrences.......... 129
one occurrence per policy year.......... 128-129
one occurrence: failure to prevent abuse.......... 127-128
M ont r os e ......... .115
Multiple insureds.......... 94-95
Multiple locations/perpetrators as separate occurrences.......... 128-129
Multiple occurrence products cases.......... 128-129, 132-134, 136, 139-140
Multiple occurrences.......... 140, 144, 147-151
Multiple plaintiffs.......... 94-95
Multiple policy limits.......... 86
Multiple site claims.......... 119-124
Multiple site claims, case law examples.......... 120
Named insured.......... 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 45, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 71
Narrow construction.......... 23
Negligence.......... 10, 11, 18, 19, 26, 33, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
58, 60, 62, 64, 65, 79, 83, 94-95, 98-99, 101-102, 114, 127, 130-135,
141, 181
Negligent acts.......... 55, 81, 101, 129-130
Negligent entrustment.......... 99, 117
Negligent misrepresentation.......... 10, 76
New optional coverage.......... 178-179
Noncumulation clauses.......... 88-90, 105, 142, 152
Number of sites.......... 118
Nursing home claims.......... 130-131
Occupational disease.......... 83-84, 150Occurrence
( de f i ne d).......... 81-83
Occurrence limit.......... 77, 80, 82, 86-87, 94, 96, 99, 101, 105, 108, 111,
114-116, 128-131, 134, 137, 141-142, 148, 152-153
Offending guideline.......... 116
One deductible for entire period of  injury.......... 107-108
One full deductible for each year.......... 104-108
One occurrence, two occurrences.......... 77-154
Ongoing operations.......... 15-17, 54-55, 62
Opportunity costs.......... 157, 162
“Other insurance” clauses.......... 105
Other job site exposures.......... 152-153
Owned property exclusion.......... 16
Ownership.......... 8, 9, 85, 119
“Per occurrence” SIR.......... 96, 104-108, 138
Per project aggregate.......... 94
Performing operations exclusion.......... 15, 22, 23, 26
Personal injury and advertising injury.......... 167-172, 174-175
( de f i ne d).......... 170-171
Phishing.......... 155
Physical injury to tangible property.......... 5, 6, 7, 8, 38, 168
Physical proximity/continuity of damage.......... 102
Piracy.......... 161
Policy aggregates.......... 85, 95
Policy limits.......... 46, 48, 50, 60, 62, 63, 67, 71, 77, 80
Policy wordings and occurrences determinations.......... 80
Pollution conditions.......... 123-124, 126
Pollution exclusion.......... 17, 136, 138, 175
Potential conflict.......... 68
Premises liability claims, case law survey.......... 109-112
Premium basis.......... 85
Primary and noncontributory coverage, CG 20 01 04 13.......... 45, 71
Privacy cause of action.......... 156, 169, 177
Privacy legislation.......... 172
Products liability claims.......... 6, 80, 123-124, 134-140 141, 146
Products-completed ope rations hazard
( de f i ne d).......... 16, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33Programming errors and om issions liability.......... 178
Property damage.......... 122-123, 126, 134-135, 141, 153, 168-172, 174-
175
( de f i ne d).......... 169-170
Property not physically injured.......... 35-36
Pro rata allocation.......... 90
Prorated deductible over triggered period.......... 108
Proximate cause.......... 97, 142
Public relations expense.......... 178-180
Publishing.......... 170-171, 178
Punitive damages.......... 69-70, 126
“Reasonable expectations”.......... 26, 27, 43
Recall exclusion.......... 40, 41, 42
Recall of products, work, or impaired property.......... 39-42
Recording and distribution of material or information in violation of
law.......... 171-172
Reinsurance disputes, case law examples.......... 124-126
Remuneration basis.......... 83-84
“Rented to”.......... 15, 16, 19, 21, 22, 28, 83, 94, 172-173
Replacement or restoration of electronic data.......... 178
Risk management approach to cyber.......... 182-184
accept the risk.......... 183
avoid the risk.......... 183
limit the risk.......... 183
transfer the risk.......... 183
Risk-shifting provision(s).......... 47, 50
Role of insured.......... 100
Scope of additional insured endorsements.......... 46
Security breach expense.......... 178
Self-insured retentions.......... 78, 96, 102-104
Separate occurrences.......... 77, 97, 105, 109, 110-112, 114, 116, 119, 122-
124, 126, 129-130, 133-136, 138, 140-141, 144-145, 150-151
Separate retention.......... 104
Sexual harassment.......... 72
Sexual molestation cases.......... 127-131
Shooting and criminal assault claims.......... 131-134
Single occurrence limit.......... 77, 87, 108, 111, 115, 129Single occurrence products cases, case law examples.......... 104, 138-139
Single site cases, case law examples.......... 119-120
Single site claims.......... 118
Single versus multiple occurrences.......... 134-138
Sistership exclusion.......... 2, 39, 41, 42
Small claims/large retentions.......... 103
Sole negligence.......... 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, -64, 65, 66, 69
Sole negligence of contracting party, s e e sole negligence
Sources of contamination at a site.......... 118
Stacking.......... 86-87, 91
Subcontractor exception.......... 13, 33, 34
Sudden and accidental injury to property.......... 37
Supplemental payments.......... 67
Tangible property.......... 5, 6, 7, 8, 36, 38, 168-169, 171
Telecasting.......... 171-172
Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA).......... 172
“That particular part”.......... 15, 22, 23, 24
Third-party outsourcing.......... 179-181
Tort liability.......... 4, 14, 64, 56, 134
Toxic tort claims against contractors.......... 153
Toxic tort litigation.......... 140-142
Toxic torts.......... 81, 133, 141
Trade dress.......... 170
Trade secret claims.......... 174
Trend to restrict additional insured coverage.......... 55
Triple trigger.......... 87
Types of additional insured status.......... 60
Types of cybercrime.......... 155-157
Ultimate net loss.......... 84, 93
Umbrella or excess coverage/insurance.......... 60, 77-78, 89, 96, 116, 131,
142, 175
Unauthorized use of another’s name or product.......... 171
Underwriter’s evaluation of the risk.......... 55
Uniform Commercial Code.......... 69
Unlimited liability.......... 1
“Used by”.......... 2, 21, 22, 73
Vicarious liability.......... 49, 53, 57, 60, 64, 65, 77Website publishing liability.......... 178
What is the cause of pollution liabilities?.......... 118-126
Who pays first?.......... 70
Widespread injuries.......... 94-95
Written contract.......... 46, 47, 48, 54, 56, 59, 73, 75
Y2K, in the beginning.......... 167
“Your product” exclusion
( de f i ne d).......... 27
“Your work” exclusion.......... 2, 13, 15, 16, 18, 24, 25, 26, 31-35
( de f i ne d).......... 31Case Index
         
Acadia Ins. Co. v. Peerless Ins. Co. 21
Acuity v. Soc iety Ins. 22
Addison Ins. Co. v. Faye 101
Admiral Ins. Co. v. Trident N.G.L., Inc. 53
Aetna C asualty & Surety Co. v. McIbs, Inc. 7
Aetna C asualty and Sur ety Co. v. Ocean Accident Guaranty Corp. 53
Aetna Life & Cas. v. Patrick Indus ., Inc. 7
Affiliated FM Ins. Co. v. Beatrice Foods  Co. 141
Air & Liquid Systems and A mpco Pittsburgh C orp. v. Allianz Ins., et al.
145
Air Produc ts and C hemical, Inc. v. Hartford Accident and I nd. C o., 16
Alex Robertson v. Imperial Cas. & Indem. Co. 68
All Tech Claims Manage ment, LLC v. Philadelphia Indemnity Ins. Co. 96
Allied Grand D oll Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Globe Indem. Co. 112
Allstate Ins. Co. v. American H ome Assurance Co. 126
Allstate Ins. Co. v. Bonn 84
Allstate v. Dana C orp. 86, 88
Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. American G irl, Inc. 9, 11, 13
American C as. Co. of Reading. v . Krueger 75
American C as.Co. v. Heary 103
American Equity Ins. Co. v. Van G inhov en 26
American Ind. C o. v. McQuaig 102, 133
American M otorist Ins. Co. v. Occidental Chemical Corp. 73
American M otorists Ins. Co. v. Trane Co. 140
American Red Cross v. The Travelers Ind. C o. 138, 143
American Red Cross v. Travelers Ind. C o. of Rhode  Island 85, 101
American Reliance Insurance Co. v. Mitchell 19
American St ates Insurance Co. v. Mathis 1, 10Amtrol Inc. v Tudor  Ins. Co. 8
Appalachian Ins. Co. v. General Electric Co. 150
Appalachian Ins. Co. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 117
Architex Association v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 34
Arcos Corp. v. American M utual Liability Ins. Co. 39
Armstrong W orld Indus tries, Inc. v. Aetna C asualty & Surety Co. 30, 39
Arnold v. Edelman 25
Associated Indemnity Corporation v. Dow Chemical 136
Asten Johns on v. Columbia Cas. Co. 94
Atchison Topeka & Sant a Fe Railway Company  v. Stonewall Ins. Co. 109,
153
Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co. v. Hillside Bottling C o., Inc. 42
Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co. v. Judd C o. 41
Atofina Petrochemicals, Inc. v. Cont. Ins. Co. . 55
Austin Mut. Ins. Co. v. Aldecoa 111
Auto Owners Ins. Co. v. Newman 13
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. American Building M aterials, Inc. 31
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Home Pride Cos. 12
Auto-Owners Ins. Co. v. Munroe 103
Babcock and W ilcox Co. v. Arkwright-Boston M anufacturing Mutual Ins.
Co. 148
Bank El Paso v. Powell 67
Barrett v. Iowa National Mut. Ins. Co. 113
Bartholomew v. Insurance Co. of North America 140
Bausch & Lomb, Inc. v. Lexington Inx. Co. 141
Bay State Ins. Co. v. Wilson 205
Benjamin Moore & Co. v. Aetna C asualty & Surety Co. 106
Benns v. Continental Cas. Co. 76
Bethpage  Water District v. S. Z ara & Sons  114
Bish v. Guaranty Nat. Ins. Co. 103
Bituminous  Casualty Corp. v. Gust K. Newberg Constr. Co. 8
Boise Cascade Corp. v. Reliance 56
Bomba v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. 133
Boston G as Company  v. Century Ind. C o. 108
Bowman St eel Corp. v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. 5
Boyd v. Travelers Ins. Co. 75
BP Chemicals, Inc. v. First State Ins. Co. 56Bright Wood C orporation v. Bankers Standar d Ins. Co. 40
Brinkerhoff v. Campbell 77
Broadhe ad v. Hartford 113
Brooklyn v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh 130
Brosnahan B uilders, Inc. v. Harleysville Mut. Ins. Co. 11
C & W Well Service, Inc. v. Sebasta 75
Caldo O il Co. v. State Water Resources Control Board 124
California Ins. Co. v. Stimson Lumber Co. 94
Capstone Bldg. C orp. v. Am. Motorists Ins. Co. 11, 12
Cargill, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 140
Carpenter Plastering C o. v. Puritan Ins. Co. 140
Cas. Ins. Co. v. Northbrook Prop. &  Casualty. Co. 54
Cashmere Pioneer Growers, Inc. v. Unigard Sec. Ins. Co. 21
Centennial Ins. Co. v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co. 121
Centex Homes Corp v. PreStressed Systems 4
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, London v . Southern Natural Gas Co.
121
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s, London v . Valiant Ins. Co. 84
Champion International Corp. v. Continental Cas. Co. 104, 138
Champion International Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 105, 138
Chemical Lehman Tank Lines, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 94
Chemstar, Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. 114
Cherrington v. Erie Prop. &  Cas. Co. 12
Chesapeake & Ohio Ry. Co. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s 152
Chicago B ridge & Iron C o. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s 91
Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Devon International, Inc. 140
Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Motorists Mut. Ins. Co. 11
City of Portsmouth v. Colonial Penn Ins. Co. 118
City of Seattle v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyds 123
Claussen v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co 17
Clemtex, Inc. v. Sout heastern Fidelity Ins. Co. 110
Cole v. Celotex 154
Colonial Gas v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co 140
Colt Indus tries, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 144
Columbia Mut. Ins. Co. v. Schauf 2, 23
Commercial Union Ins. Co. v. Porter Hayden Co. 143
Conne cticut Ins. Guaranty Assoc. v. Union C arbide Corp. 111Consolidated Edison C o. of New York, Inc. v. Employers Ins. Co. of
Wausau 121
Continental Ins. Companies v. Hancock 112
Corner Const. Co. v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co 12
Country Mutual Ins. Co. v. Waldman M ercantile Co., Inc. 20
Crane Serv. & Equip. Corp. v. United States Fid. & Guar. Co. 21
CSX Transportation, Inc. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co. 94
CSX Transportation, Inc. v. Continental Ins. Co. 153
D.R. Horton – T exas, Ltd. v. Markel Int’l Ins. Co., Ltd. 55
Danielson v. ABC Ins. Co. 101
Davis v. LTV Steel Co. 50
Denham  v. La Sal le-Madison H otel Co. 113
Devillier v. Alpine Exploration C o. 128
Dewitt Constr. Inc. v. Charter Oak Fire Ins. Co. 7
Diamond Sham rock Chemicals Co. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 94
Dickerson v. Thompson 111
Dodson v. St. Paul Ins. Co. 12
Domtar, Inc. v. Niagar a Fire Ins. Co. 124
Donegal Ins.Co. v. Baumhammers 135
Dorchester Mut. Fire. Ins. Co. v. First Kostas Corp., Inc. 38
Doria v. INA Co. of N. Am. 112
Dow Chemical Corp. v. Associated Indemnity Corp. 136
Dow Corning v. Continental Casualty Co. 141
Dragas  Manage ment Corp. v. Hanov er Ins. Co. 139, 142
Dresser Indus tries v. Page Petroleum, Inc. 69
Ducre v. Mine Safety Appliances Co. 154
E.I. duP ont de Nemours v. Admiral Ins. Co. 123
E.R. Squi bb &  Sons , Inc. v. Accident and C asualty Ins. Co. 93
Employers Mut. Cas. Co. v. Pires 26
Endicott Johns on C orp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 123
Erie Ins. Exch. v. Colony Dev. Corp. 13
Esicorp, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 7
Evanston Ins. Co. v. Atofina Petrochemicals 57
Evanston Ins. Co. v. Ghillie Suits Com., Inc. 112
Exxon C orp. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. 155
ExxonMobil Corp. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s 137
F&H Constr. v. ITT Hartford Ins. Co. of the Midwest 8Farmington C as. Co. v. Duggan  25
Fejes v. Alaska Ins. Co. 18
Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Md .v. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. 8
Fina, Inc. v. Travelers Ind. C o. 83, 151
Fireguard Spr inkler Systems, Inc. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 28
Firemans Fund I ns. Co. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 114
Firemen’s Fund I ns. Co. of Newark v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. 12
Flintkote Co. v. General Accident Assurance Co. of Canada  149
Flores v. Livwell, Inc. 197
Fortney v. Weygandt , Inc. v. Am. Mfrs. Mut. Ins. Co. 22
Foust v. Range r Ins. Co. 155
Frontier Insulation C ontractors, Inc. v. Merchants Mutual Ins. Co. 85,
143
Garamendi v. Mission Ins. Co. 124
Garcia v. Physicians Insurance Exchange  89
Genesis Ins. Co. v. BRE Props. 18
Gibraltar Casualty Co. v. Sargent & Lundy  8
Goose Creek Consol. I.S.D. v. Continental Cas. Co. 113
Gore Design C ompletions, Ltd. v. Hartford Fire Ins. 22
Graceda v. Tagle 75
Granite Construction C o., Inc. v. Bituminous  Ins. Co. 75, 76
Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co. v. Commercial Union Assu. Co. 76
Great Lakes Dredge and D ock Company  v. The City of Chicago 90
Greene Tweed & Co., Inc. v. Hartford Acc. & Ind. 90, 145
Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Ins. v. Lynne 14
Grinnell Mutual Reinsurance Co. v. Lynne 23
Guaranty National Ins. Co. v. North River Ins. Co. 119
H.E. Butt Grocery Co. v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. 131
H.E. Butt Grocery Co. v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh 99
H.E. Davis & Sons , Inc. v. N. Pac. Ins. Co. 37
H.K. Porter v. Pennsylvania Ins. Guaranty Assoc. 111
Hamlin Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indem. Co 36
Harleysville Worcester Ins. Co. v. Paramount Concrete, Inc. 38
Hartford Accid. & Indem. Co. v. U.S. N atural Res. Inc. 54
Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co. v. Ace American Reinsurance Co. 149
Hartog Rahal P’ship v. American M otorists Ins. Co. 30
Hercules Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 94, 109, 121Hercules, Inc. v. AIU Insurance Company  90
Hiraldo v. Allstate Ins. Co. 91
Home Depot U.S.A. v. National Fire Ins. Co. of Hartford 57
Home Ind. C o. v. City of Mobile 115
Home Ins. Co. v. Aetna C asualty & Surety Co. 92
Honeycomb Systems, Inc. v. Admiral Ins. Co. 142
Hotel Roanok e Conference Center Comm. v. Cincinnati Ins. Co. 10
Houg v . State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. 129
Household Manuf. Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 141
Houston v. Avondal e Shipyards, Inc. 154
Illinois Central Railroad C o. v. Acc. & Cas. Co. of Winterthur 118
Imperial Casualty & Indem. Co. v. High C oncrete Structures, Inc. 29
In Range r Ins. Co. v. Safety-Kleen Corp. 88, 108
In Re Liquidation of  Midland I ns. Co. 89
INA v. Forty-Eight Insulations, Inc. 89
Indemnity Ins. Co. v. North American C ity of Tacoma 125
Indiana G as Co., Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 123
Ingersoll-Rand C o. v. Ins. Co. of N. Am. 107
International Flavors and F ragrances, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of America
138
International Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s
145
Interstate Fire & Casualty Co. v. Archdiocese of Portland 129
J.A. Jones Construction C o. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. 76
Jenkins v. Koester 206
Jenks v. State of Florida 192
Jet Line Services Inc. v. American Employers Ins. Co. 23
John M ason v. The Home Ins. Co. of Illinois 113
Johns on C orp. v. Indemnity Ins. Co. of North America 115
K & L Homes, Inc. v. Am. Family Mut.Ins. Co. 12
Kalchthaler v. Keller Construction C o. 9
Kansas State Bank & Trust v. Midwest Mutual Ins. Co. 132
Keene v. INA 89
Keystone Filler & Mfg. Co. v. Am. Mining Ins. Co. 42
Kiewit Eastern Co. v. L&R Constr. Co., Inc. 67
Koikos v. Travelers Insurance Company . 83, 134
Kosnoski v. Rogers 112Kvaerner ES, Inc. v. One Beacon Ins. Co. 116
Kvaerner Metals Division of  Kvaerner v. Commercial Union Insurance
Co. 9
Lafarge Corp. v. Hartford Ins. Co. 89, 110
Lagas tee-Mulder, Inc. v. Consol. Ins. Co. 12
Lamar Homes Inc. v. Mid-Continent Cas. Co. 11, 14
Lee v. Interstate Fire & Cas. Co. 129
Lennar  Corp. v. Great Am. Ins. Co. 8
Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. MI Window s & Doors, Inc. 28
Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. v. Zurich Ins. Co. 20
Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v. Treesdale, Inc. 90, 140, 145
L-J, Inc. and E agle Creek Const. Co. v. Bituminous  Fire & Marine Ins.
Co. 11
London M arket Insurers v. Supe rior Court 149
London M arket Insurers v. Supe rior Court of Los Angeles County 83, 87,
93, 137, 147
LSJ Technologies, Inc. v. U.S. Fire Ins. Co. 84
Marathon A shland P ipeline LLC v. Maryland C as. Co. 53
Martin v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. 17
Maryland C as. Co. v. W.R. Grace and C o. 151
Maryland C asualty Co. v. Wausau C hemical Corp. 17
Maryland C asualty Co. v. Hanson 154
Maurice Pincoffs Co. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. 137
McCarthy Bros. Co. v. Continental Lloyds Ins. Co. 54
McGowan v. State Farm Fire and C as. Co. 25
McIntosh v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 53
Mead Reinsurance v. Granite State Ins. Co. 119
Mello Constr., Inc. v. Acadia Ins. Co. 11
Mennen Company  v. Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co. 94
Merchant’s Ins. Co. v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co. 54
Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Aetna C asualty & Surety Co. 99
Michaels v. Mutual Marine Office, Inc. 112
Michigan C hemical Corp. v. American H ome Assur. Corp. 137
Microvote Corp. v. GRE Ins. Group 30
Mid-Century Ins. Co. v. Shut t 119
Mid-Continent Cas. Co. v. Basedeo 115
Mid-Continent Cas. Co. v. JHP Dev., Inc. 22, 24Mid-Continent Casualty Co. v. Swift Energy Co. 69
Miley v. Continental Ins. Co. 103
Missouri Pacific Railroad C o. v. International Ins. Co. 107
Mitsui Sum itomo Ins. Co. of America v. Automatic Elevator Co. 100
Moore v. Whitney-Vahy Ins. Agency 75
Morton-Thiokol, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 144, 145
Mt. McKinley Ins. Co. v. Corning, Inc. 116
National Clothing C o. v. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. 30
National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Lynette C. 130
Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Lafarge Corp. 109, 139
Neth. Ins. Co. v. Main St. Ingredients 7
New Hampshire Insurance Company  v. RLI Insurance Co. 133
Nicor, Inc. v. Aegis 142
Norfolk & Western Railway Co. v. Accident & Casualty Ins. Co. of
Winterthur 152
Northern States Power Co. v. Fidelity & Cas. Co. 106
Northern States Power Co. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins. Co. 120
Norwalk Ready Mixed Concrete v. Travelers Ins. Cos. 10
O-I Brockway Glass Container, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 90
Olin Corporation v. INA 107
Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 94
Owens Illinois, Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 146
Owens Illinois, Inc. v. United Insurance Co. 82, 105, 106, 146
Owners Ins. Co. v. Jim Carr Homebuilder, LLC 12
Owners Ins. Co. v. Salmonsen 114
P.R. Mallory & Co., Inc. v. American C as. Co. 121
Pekin Ins. Co. v. Willett 26
Pennzoil-Quaker State Co. v. American International Specialty Lines Ins.
Co. 125
Philadelphia Elec. Co. v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. 54
Pine Oak Builders, Inc. v. Great American Lloyds Ins. Co. 33
Pinkerton &  Laws, Inc. v. Royal Ins. Co. of America 36
Pinney v. Tarpley 67
Plante v. Columbia Paints 119
Plastics Engineering C o. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co. 151
Potomac Ins. v. Huang  38
Preferred Risk Mutual Ins. Co. v. Watson 131Pulte Home Corp. v. Fidelity & Guar. Ins. Co. 34
Pursell Constr., Inc. v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co. 11
Ramirez v. Allstate Ins. Co. 84, 154
Range r Ins. Co. v. Safety-Kleen Corp. 88, 108
Republic Underwriters, Inc. v. Moore 114
Reynolds v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 112
RLI Ins. Co. v. Simon’s Rock Early College 133
RNA Investments, Inc. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau 75
Roaring Lion, L LC v. Nautilus Ins. Co. 23
Roman C atholic Diocese of Joliet, Inc. v. Interstate Fire Ins. Co. 129
Royal Ins. Co. of America v. Caliber One Indemnity Co. 132
Ruthart v. Underwriters at Lloyd’s London  93
S.F. v. West American Ins. Co. 101, 131
Saav edra v. Murphy Oil U.S.A. 54
Safeco Ins. Co. of America v. Fireman’s Fund I ns. Co. 116
Safeguard Ins. Co. v. Angel Guardian H ome 130
Savoy Med. Suppl y Co., Inc. v. F & H Mfg. Corp. 17
Schafer v. Paragano C ustom Building, Inc. 58
Scottsdale Ins. Co. v. Robertson 112
Scottsdale Ins. Co. v. Tri-State Ins. Co. of Minnesota 30
Seagate Tech., Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. 8
Shade  Foods , Inc. v. Innov ative Produc ts Sales and M arketing, Inc. 38
Sheehan C onst. Co., Inc. v. Continental Ins. Co. 12
Shell Oil Co. v. AC&S, Inc. 53
Skinner Corp. v. Fireman’s Fund I ns. Co. 108
Slater v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co. 110
Society of Roman C atholic Church of Diocese of Lafayette, Inc. v.
Interstate Fire and C asualty Co. 94
Sokol & Co. v. Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co. 7, 37
Spaul ding C omposites Company , Inc. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 91
Sphe re Drake Ins. Co. v. Tremco, Inc. 3
Standar d Venetian Blind C o. v. Am. Empire Ins. Co. 30
State Farm Lloyd’s, v. Jones 205
State Farm Lloyd’s Inc. v. Williams 102, 135
State National Ins. Co. v. Lamberti 117
State of California v. Continental Ins. Co. 88
Sting Se curity, Inc. v. First Mercury Syndicate, Inc. 141Stonelight Tile, Inc. v. California Insurance Guaranty Association 84
Stoneridge Dev. Co. v. Essex Ins. Co. 9
Stonewall Ins. Co. v. Asbestos Claims Manage ment Corp. 105, 150
Stonewall Ins. Co. v. E.I. Du Pont De Nemours & Co. 90, 108
Stonewall Insurance Company  v. Argonaut  Insurance Co. 127
Sunoc o, Inc. v. Illinois National Ins. Co. 139
Thommes v. Milwaukee Mutual Ins. Co. 2, 4
TIG Ins. Co. v. Sedgwick James of Washington 75
TIG Insurance Company  v. San A ntonio YMCA 130
Tobi Engineering, Inc. v. Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. 5
TPLC, Inc. v. United National Ins. Co. 110
Transcontinental Ins. Co. v. Ice Systems of America 37
Transport Ins. Co. v. Lee Way Motor Freight Co. 118
Transpower Constructors v. Grand R iver Dam 69
Travelers Cas. & Sur. Co. v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s 125
Travelers Ind. C o. v. Olive’s Spor ting G oods  102, 133
Travelers Indemnity Co v. New England B ox Co. 113
Travelers Ins. Co. v. Eljer Mfg, Inc. 6
Tri-State Roofing C o. v. New Amsterdam Cas. Co. 113
Truck Ins. Exchange  v. Kaiser Cement & Gypsum Corp. 146
U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. Aetna Life Ins. and C as. Co. 55
U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. J.S.U.B., Inc. 12, 13
U.S. Fire Ins. Co. v. Safeco Ins. Co. 115
U.S. G ypsum Co. v. Admiral Ins. Co. 146
Union Ins. Co. v. Hottenstein 10
Uniroyal, Inc. v. The Home Ins. Co. 138
United States Fid. and G uar. Co. v. Wilkin Insulation C o. 39
Urie v. Thompson 86
USAA v. Bagge tt 104
USAA v. Neary 135
Utica Mut. Ins. Co. v. Weathermark Investments, Inc. 7
Valmont Energy Steel, Inc. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co. 29
Vande nberghe v. Amco Ins. Co. 115
Via Net v. TIG Ins. Co. 76
Village Manage ment, Inc. v. Hartford Acc. & Ind. C o. 118
Wann v . Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. 75
Wanzek Constr., Inc. v. Employers Ins. of Wausau 3Wanzek Constr., Inc. v. Emplrs. Ins. 35
Ware v. First Specialty Ins. Corp. 113
Washoe County v. Transcontinental Ins. Co. 105, 129
Webster v. Acadia Ins. Co. 12
Weedo v. Stone-E-Brick, Inc. 3
Welter v. Singer 103
Westchester Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v. Maverick Tube Corp. 141
Western World Ins. Co. v. Wilkie 84, 111
Westinghous e Electric Corp. v. Aetna C as. & Sur. Co. 146
Weyerhaeuser Co. v. Commercial Union Ins. Co. 85
Whittaker Corp. v. Allianz Underwriters 81
Wilkinson and Son, I nc. v. Providence Washington Ins. Co. 115
William C. Vick Constr. Co, v Pennsylvania Nat’l Mut. Ins. Co. 13
Worcester Ins. Co. v. Fells Acres Day School, Inc. 131