THE NATIONAL UNDERWRITER COMPANY
a division of ALM Media, LLC
Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide, 12th Edition
Donald S. Malecki, CPCU, David Thamann, J.D., CPCU, ARM,
Hannah E. Smith, J.D.
The ISO Commercial General Liability form is the backbone of most
commercial insurance programs. That’s why virtually every insurance
professional must be able to navigate it confidently. Commercial
General Liability Coverage Guide is the only professional resource
that traces the coverage provisions of the ISO CLG form from the
1986 (in some cases earlier editions) to the mostly recently released
form.
This practical guide has proven itself as the gold-standard for
handling CGL coverage. With a focus on real-world application, the
book has been a perpetual best seller since the first edition was
published in 1985. Now in its 12th edition, this singular reference
extends the long-standing tradition of continuous improvement with
the inclusion of significant new material and updates:
•    Case summaries of some of the most important court
decisions that directly affect the CGL policy interpretation from
the past year
•    An in-depth analysis of several issues that have recently
become more popular in the CGL, including:
∘    The Care Custody and Control Exclusion
∘    The Pollution Exclusion
∘    The “Your Product” and “Your Work” Exclusions
∘    The Expected or Intended Exclusion∘    Additional Insureds
∘    Property Damage
∘    Professional Liability and General Liability Insurance
∘    Separation of Insureds
∘    State-by-State Analysis of Dram Shop Laws
∘    Legal Status of Punitive Damages Insurability and
Premises Liability
∘    Liquor Liability Provision and the 2017 Changes to the
Endorsement
•    Coverage Checklists for General Liability and for Commercial
Umbrella and Excess Liability
Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide also includes the
Umbrella Form and Excess Form themselves, along with fully updated
case law and a revised case law index.
In addition to the all-new material, expert authors Donald S. Malecki,
David Thamann and Hannah E. Smith have fully reviewed and revised
(where necessary) the entire book. The 12th edition contains
everything you’ve come to expect from this industry-standard CGL
resource, including:
•    Original discussion and expert analysis supported by up-to-
date multi-jurisdictional case law
•    The real-life examples that make this book the most practical
CGL resource
•    Analyses of endorsements that may be used to tailor
coverage
•    Highlights of the major changes seen in the 2013 ISO CGL
form and analysis of how they affect coverage.Only the Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide enables you
to master the Commercial General Liability form, navigate all the
major policy provisions, correctly interpret policy language, and keep
your focus on practical applications to real-world situations.
For customer service questions or to place additional orders, please
call 1-800-543-0874.
Coverage Guides Also Available:
Business Income
Businessowners Policy
Commercial Auto Program
Commercial Property
Condominium Insurance
Critical Issues in CGL
Directors & Officers Liability
Employment Practices Liability
General Liability Insurance Coverage
Guide to Captives and Alternative Risk Financing
Homeowners
Insurance Claims: A Comprehensive Guide
Mold Claims
Personal Auto Policy
Personal Lines Endorsements
Personal Umbrella
Small Business Auto Coverage Guide
Workers CompensationThis publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the
understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought.—from a Declaration of
Principles jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar
Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations.
Copyright © 2017 by
THE NATIONAL UNDERWRITER COMPANY
4157 Olympic Blvd.
Suite 225
Erlanger, KY 41018
March 2017
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior
written permission of the publisher.
Includes copyrighted material of Insurance Services Office, Inc., with
its permission.
This product includes information which is proprietary to Insurance
Services Office, Inc. ISO does not guarantee the accuracy or
timeliness of the ISO information provided. ISO shall not be liable forany loss or damage of any kind and howsoever caused resulting from
your use of the ISO information.
Reproductions of and quotations from ISO, AAIS and MSO insurance
policies and forms in this book are the copyrighted material of
Insurance Services Office, Inc., American Association of Insurance
Services and The Mutual Service Office and are used with
permission.
International Standard Book Number: 978-1-945424-34-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017932468
Printed in the United States of AmericaAbout The National Underwriter Company a
division of ALM Media, LLC
For over 110 years, The National Underwriter Company, a division of
ALM Media, LLC has been the first in line with the targeted tax,
insurance, and financial planning information you need to make critical
business decisions. Boasting nearly a century of expert experience,
our reputable Editors are dedicated to putting accurate and relevant
information right at your fingertips. With Tax Facts, Tools &
Techniques, National Underwriter Advanced Markets, Field Guide,
FC&S®, FC&S Legal and other resources available in print, eBook,
CD, and online, you can be assured that as the industry evolves
National Underwriter will be at the forefront with the thorough and
easy-to-use resources you rely on for success.
Update Service Notification
This National Underwriter Company publication is regularly updated to
include coverage of developments and changes that affect the
content. If you did not purchase this publication directly from The
National Underwriter Company, a division of ALM Media, LLC and
you want to receive these important updates sent on a 30-day review
basis and billed separately, please contact us at (800) 543-0874. Or
you can mail your request with your name, company, address, and
the title of the book to:
The National Underwriter Company
a division of ALM Media, LLC
4157 Olympic Boulevard
Suite 225
Erlanger, KY 41018If you purchased this publication from The National Underwriter
Company, a division of ALM Media, LLC, directly, you have already
been registered for the update service.
Contact Information
To order any National Underwriter Company title, please
•    call 1-800-543-0874, 8-6 ET Monday – Thursday and 8 to 5
ET Friday
•    online bookstore at www.nationalunderwriter.com, or
•    mail to Orders Department, The National Underwriter
Company, a division of ALM Media, LLC, 4157 Olympic Blvd.,
Ste. 225, Erlanger, KY 41018About the Authors
Donald S. Malecki, CPCU
The insurance world in general and the National Underwriter
Company in particular have lost a colleague and a friend. Don Malecki
passed away on Friday, December 12, 2014.
Don was a recognized insurance and risk management expert
who spent over fifty years in the business as a writer, consultant, and
expert witness. Don began his career as a fire underwriter and later
as a supervising casualty underwriter. He began his writing career
when he joined the staff of the Fire, Casualty, and Surety (FC&S)
Bulletins, the National Underwriter Company, in 1966. Don left the
National Underwriter Company in 1984 to start his own consulting
practice, a practice in which he contributed his every working hour
toward understanding the insurance business, and sharing that
understanding and knowledge with all those seeking his guidance.
Don was a recognized expert witness who was called upon numerous
times over his career to testify in courts around the country as to the
history and meaning of insurance policy language. Don was also an
author and co-author of many books on insurance and risk
management. He was past president of the Cincinnati Chapter of
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters (CPCU) and a member of
the Society of Risk Management Consultants.
It is safe to say that Don Malecki was a giant in the insurance
industry, a man who dedicated his life’s work to learning and teaching
about insurance coverage and risk management. Don will be greatly
missed by those who benefitted in the past and still benefit now from
his sharing of his time and knowledge, and he will be especially
missed by those who knew him and worked with him. God Bless.David D. Thamann, J.D., CPCU, ARM
David D. Thamann, J.D., ARM, CPCU, is the managing editor of
the FC&S Bulletins® and has been an FC&S editor since 1987.
Before joining the National Underwriter Company, he was a claims
supervisor and senior underwriter for American Druggists Insurance
Company, a commercial property lead underwriter for Transamerica
Insurance, and a commercial package underwriter for CNA and
Safeco Insurance companies.
Mr. Thamann graduated from Salmon P. Chase College of Law
and Xavier University.
The publications he wrote or contributed to include Business Auto
Coverage Guide, Personal Auto Coverage Guide, Workers
Compensation Guide, and Commercial General Liability
Supplement, all published by The National Underwriter Company, a
division of ALM Media, LLC. Mr. Thamann also writes articles for
Claims magazine, InsWorld, and ProducersWEB. He is a speaker or
presenter at various insurance related seminars and meetings.
Hannah E. Smith, J.D.
Hannah E. Smith, J.D. and CPCU Candidate, is an editor of the
FC&S Bulletins®. She graduated from Salmon P. Chase College of
Law and the University of Cincinnati. Publications she has contributed
to include the Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide 12th
Edition, the Small Business Auto Coverage Guide, and the 2015,
2016 and 2017 Cancellation & Nonrenewal and Licensing & Surplus
Lines books.About the Publisher
Kelly B. Maheu, J.D.
Kelly B. Maheu, J.D., is Vice President in charge of the Practical
Insights Division of ALM Media, which produces National
Underwriter’s professional publications. Kelly has been with National
Underwriter since 2006, and has served as the Managing Director of
National Underwriter’s Professional Publishing Division as well as
performing editorial, content acquisition, and product development
roles.
Prior to joining The National Underwriter Company, Kelly worked
in the legal and insurance fields for LexisNexis®, Progressive
Insurance, and a Cincinnati insurance defense litigation firm.
Kelly has edited and contributed to numerous books and
publications including the Personal Auto Insurance Policy Coverage
Guide, Cyberliability and Insurance, The National Underwriter Sales
Essentials Series, and The Tools & Techniques of Risk Management
for Financial Planners.
Kelly earned her law degree from The University of Cincinnati
College of Law and holds a BA from Miami University, Ohio, with a
double major in English/Journalism and Psychology.
Editorial Services
Connie L. Jump, Manager, Editorial Operations
Emily Brunner, Editorial AssistantTable of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Coverage A—Bodily Injury and Property Damage
Liability
Insuring Agreement
Supplementary Payments
Exclusions
Chapter 2: Coverage B—Personal and Advertising Injury Liability
Insuring Agreement
Exclusions
Chapter 3: Coverage C—Medical Payments
Insuring Agreement
Exclusions
Chapter 4: Managing the Claims-Made Trigger
Reasons for Claims-Made Trigger
Occurrence Trigger Provisions
Montrose Provision
Claims-Made Provisions
Retroactive Date
Extended Reporting Periods
Considerations in Issuing Claims-Made Policies
Chapter 5: General Provisions
Who is an Insured
Limits of Insurance
ConditionsChapter 6: CGL Endorsements and Miscellaneous Coverage
Forms
Deductible Endorsements
Additional Coverage Endorsements
Additional Insured Endorsements
Exclusions Endorsements
Terrorism Endorsement Options
Endorsements for Certain Types of Risks
Coverage Amendment Endorsements
Amendment of Limits Endorsements
Claims-Made Endorsements
Other Endorsements
Miscellaneous Coverage Forms
Professional Services Exclusion Endorsements
Chapter 7: Commercial Umbrella Liability Insurance
General Features
Specific Features
Umbrella Coverage Issues
Chapter 8: Commercial Liability Umbrella Policy
Coverage A—Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability
Coverage A Exclusions
Coverage B—Personal and Advertising Injury Liability
Coverage B Exclusions
Supplementary Payments—C overages A and B
Section II—Who Is an Insured
Section III—Limits of Insurance
Section IV—Conditions
Section V—Definitions
EndorsementsChapter 9: Commercial Excess Liability Coverage Form
Section I—Coverages
Section II—Limits of Insurance
Section III—Conditions
Section IV—Definitions
Chapter 10: Businessowners Liability Compared with CGL
Coverage
Business Liability Coverage
Chapter 11: Issues in Commercial General Liability Insurance
The Pollution Exclusion
Care, Custody, or Control Exclusion
“Your Product” and “Your Work” Exclusions
Expected or Intended
Occurrence
Additional Insureds
Property Damage
Professional Liability and General Liability Insurance
The Continuous Injury Trigger and Progressive Injury Exclusions
Separation of Insureds
The Impaired Property Exclusion of Liability Policies
Blanket Additional Insureds
Chapter 12: Court Cases of Interest
Duty to Defend
Occurrence
Exclusions
Personal and Advertising
Additional Insured and Additional Insurance
Classification of Worker
Bad Faith and CollusionOngoing Operations Provision
Continuous Trigger Theory
Loss of Use
“Other Insurance” Violation of Public Policy
Malicious Prosecution
Professional Services
General Aggregate
Cyber Coverage
Car Wash Damages
Limited Liability Company Coverage
Request for Reimbursement of Defense Cost
Appendices
Appendix A
GL Policy Jacket Provisions
1973 Comprehensive General Liability Form
Broad Form Comprehensive General Liability Endorsement
Appendix B
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 01 12 07
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 02 12 07
Appendix C
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 01 04 13
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 02 04 13
Appendix D
Commercial General Liability Declarations—C G DS 01 10 01
Appendix E
Common Policy Conditions—IL 00 17 11 98Appendix F
Commercial Liability Umbrella Coverage Form—CU 00 01 04 13
Appendix G
Commercial Excess Liability Coverage Form—CX 00 01 04 13
Appendix H
Legal Status of Punitive Damages Insurability
Liquor Liability
Premises Liability
Dram Shop Laws
Appendix I
Checklists—C GL Coverage and Commercial Umbrella and Excess
Liability Coverage
Index
Case Index
To access more forms and supplemental material please visit:
http://nationalunderwriterpc.nuco.com/booksupplements/cgl12ed/ 
Pages/default.aspxIntroduction
In 1986, insurers began using a new series of general liability
forms and endorsements. These forms and endorsements were
developed by Insurance Services Office (ISO) to replace the 1973
edition of the comprehensive general liability coverage part and
related forms and endorsements. An immediate concern of risk
managers and insurance personnel was how the 1986 forms,
particularly the two commercial general liability coverage forms that
were the nucleus of the new program, differed from the 1973 forms.
The first and second editions of this text addressed that concern
by describing the two new coverage forms and explaining how they
differed from the 1973 comprehensive general liability coverage part
and broad form comprehensive general liability endorsement (which
was commonly attached to the CGL coverage part).
A third edition was necessitated by ISO’s introduction of revised
commercial general liability (CGL) coverage forms, effective March 1,
1990, in most jurisdictions. This text refers to those forms as the
1990 CGL coverage forms, even though the forms are dated 11/88
(November 1988), the date that ISO originally set for their effective
date. The considerable gap between the date on the forms and their
actual effective date was largely the result of negotiations between
ISO and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners on
various features of the revised forms.
A fourth edition of Commercial General Liability was prepared to
add analysis of further modifications proposed by ISO for introduction
in 1992. These changes were implemented in only a few states partly
because some of the changes affecting coverage for defense costs
assumed by the insured under a contract were controversial.A fifth edition was published to include further changes introduced
in 1993. These changes were more readily accepted by regulators
than the 1992 changes. Because of the controversial nature of the
1992 revisions, they were not incorporated into the new CGL forms
containing the 1993 changes. In those jurisdictions that accepted both
the 1992 and the 1993 revisions, the 1992 changes could be added
to the 1993 form by use of a standard amendatory endorsement.
The sixth edition of Commercial General Liability described
further changes that were filed in thirty-five states plus the District of
Columbia in 1995. Because these forms became effective in most
states in 1996, they are referred to in this text as the 1996 forms.
Although many of the changes made to the 1996 forms are editorial
and do not have a substantial effect on coverage, some of the 1996
changes do affect coverage. In fact, most of the 1992 changes (with
some modifications) have been included in the 1996 forms.
Like the earlier editions, the sixth edition continued to compare the
CGL coverage forms to the 1973 general liability program, since
some insurers still used the older forms. Two years after the 1996
policy revisions were introduced, ISO introduced some additional
revisions; the major ones affecting the pollution exclusion and
Coverage B-Personal and Advertising Injury. Since, with the exception
of the latter two revisions, most other amendments were minor, a
supplement was issued instead of another edition of the book.
The seventh edition discussed not only the 1986, 1990, 1992,
1993, 1996 and 1998 versions of the CGL forms, but also the
revisions that took effect in December 2001 in the majority of states
and in other states in early 2002. Many comparisons with the 1973
CGL form were eliminated in the seventh edition because these forms
are seldom used today and most practitioners are no longer familiar
with them as a point of comparison. However, comparisons to the
1973 CGL form and broad form CGL endorsement continue to bemade when such references are helpful in understanding the current
CGL forms.
The eighth edition encompasses not only the preceding editions
back to 1986, but also two revisions earmarked for 2004 and one
revision to be effective in 2005.
The first of the two 2004 revisions became effective in July, 2004.
This revision involved some of the additional insured endorsements
that, according to ISO, were being interpreted by the courts to
provide coverage for the sole fault of the additional insured even
when the named insured remained blameless. A new contractual
limitation endorsement also was introduced that, as an underwriting
tool, could be used to make contractual liability coverage correspond
to the coverage of these revised additional insured endorsements.
The second set of changes took effect in December, 2004, and
involves numerous amendments to endorsements and two new
coverage parts: electronic data liability coverage and product
withdrawal and recall coverage.
The 2005 changes, though largely editorial, introduce two
exclusions. The first one is mandatory and targets violators of
unsolicited facsimiles under the Telephone Consumer Protection Act
of 1991, and violators of unsolicited e-mail messages under the CAN-
SPAM Act of 2003.
The ninth edition discusses the preceding editions back to 1986
(and in some cases, earlier), along with the revisions introduced in the
2004, 2005 and 2007 CGL forms. Where necessary, the implications
and potential problem areas of the 2007 revisions are also discussed.
The 2007 changes are for the most substantive even though some
are restrictions. They involve Coverage B – personal and advertisinginjury liability; the supplementary payment provision regarding the
exclusion of attorneys’ fees or expenses taxed against the insured;
the “tightening up” of two endorsements involving the employment-
related practices exclusion and the abuse or molestation exclusion;
and the introduction of some new endorsements to enable insurers to
provide coverage in the area of completed operations for
snowplowing, real estate operations, and coverage for the use of
canoes and rowboats.
The tenth edition traces the coverage provisions of the ISO CGL
form from the 1986 (and earlier) edition to the most recently released
form from April 2013. As a broad overview, the 2013 revisions involve
the following:
Five exclusions that are built into the occurrence and claims-made
coverage forms: (1) liquor liability; (2) aircraft, auto or watercraft; (3)
electronic data; (4) recording and distribution of material or
information in violation of law; and (5) material published with
knowledge of falsity and material published prior to the policy period.
The other insurance condition.
Definitions of auto and mobile equipment.
Two liquor liability coverage forms.
Railroad protective liability coverage form.
Two pollution liability coverage forms.
Electronic data liability coverage form.
The following multi-state endorsements:Limited product withdrawal endorsement CG 04 36; Electronic
data liability endorsement CG 04 37; Additional Insured—
Concessionaires Trading Under Your Name CG 20 03; Additional
Insured—Controlling Interest CG 20 05; Additional Insured--
Engineers, Architects, or Surveyors CG 20 07; Additional Insured—
Users Of Golfmobiles CG 2 08; Additional Insured—Owners,
Lessees Or Contractors—S cheduled Person or Organization CG 20
10; Additional Insured—Managers Or Lessors of Premises CG 20
11; Additional Insured—State Or Government Agency Or Subdivision
Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or Authorizations CG 20 12;
Additional Insured—State Or Governmental Agency Or Subdivision
Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or Authorizations Relating To
Premises CG 20 13; Additional Insured—Vendors CG 20 15;
Additional Insured—Mortgagee, Assignee Or Receiver CG 20 18;
Additional Insured—Executors, Administrators, Trustees Or
Beneficiaries CG 20 23; Additional Insured—Owners Or Other
Interest From Whom Land Has Been Leased CG 20 24;Additional
Insured—Designated Person Or Organization CG 20 26; Additional
Insured—Co-Owner Of Insured Premises; Additional Insured—
Lessor Of Leased Premises CG 20 27; Additional Insured—Lessor
Of Leased Equipment CG 20 28; Additional Insured—Grantor Of
Franchise CG 20 29; Oil Or Gas Operations—N onoperating, Working
Interests CG 20 30; Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects Or
Surveyors CG 20 31; Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects Or
Surveyors—N ot Engaged By The Named Insured CG 20 32;
Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—A utomatic
Status When Required In Construction; CG 20 33; Additional Insured
—Lessor Of Leased Equipment—Automatic Status When Required In
Lease Agreement With You CG 20 34; Additional Insured—Grantor
Of Licenses—A utomatic Status When Required By Licensor CG 20
35; Additional Insured—Grantor Of Licenses CG 20 36; Additional
Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—C ompleted Operations
CG 20 37; and Additional Insured—State Or Governmental Agency
Or Subdivision Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or Authorizations
CG 29 35.Revision To Amendment Of Liquor Liability Endorsements: CG 21
50 and CG 21 51 applicable to the CGL Coverage Part; and CG 29
52 and CG 29 53 applicable to the Products-Completed Operations
Coverage Part; Exclusion--Failure To Supply CG 22 50; Pesticide Or
Herbicide Applicator Coverage Endorsements CG 22 64 and CG 28
12; Lawn Care Services Coverage Endorsement CG 22 93;
Druggists Endorsement CG 22 69; Real Estate Property Managed
CG 22 70; Colleges Or Schools (Limited Form) Endorsement CG 22
71 and Colleges Or Schools Endorsement CG 22 72; Waiver Of
Governmental Immunity Endorsement CG 24 14; Amendment Of
Coverage Territory—W orldwide Coverage CG 24 22; Amendment Of
Coverage Territory—A dditional Scheduled Counties CG 24 23;
Amendment Of Coverage Territory—W orldwide Coverage With
Specific Exceptions CG 24 24; Amendment of Insured Contract
Definition CG 24 26; Limited Contractual Liability—R ailroads CG 24
27;
Exclusion—Designated Professional Services CG21 16; Exclusion
—Financial Services CG 21 52; Exclusion--Funeral Services CG 21
56; Exclusion—Counseling Services CG 21 57; Exclusion—
Professional Veterinarian Services CG 21 58; Exclusion—Diagnostic
Testing Laboratories CG 21 59; Exclusion—Inspection, Appraisal And
Survey Companies CG 22 24; Exclusion—Professional Services—
Blood Banks CG 22 32; Exclusion—Testing Or Consulting Errors Or
Omissions CG 22 33; Exclusion—Construction Management Errors
And Omissions CG 22 34; Exclusion—Products And Professional
Services (Druggists); Exclusion—Products And Professional Services
(Optical And Hearing Aid Establishments) CG 22 37; Exclusion—
Camps Or Campgrounds CG 22 39; Exclusion—Engineers, Architects
Or Surveyors Professional Liability CG 22 43; Exclusion—Services
Furnished By Health Care Providers CG 22 44; Exclusion—Specified
Therapeutic Or Cosmetic Services CG 22 45; Exclusion—Insurance
And Related Operations CG 22 48; Druggists CG 22 69; Colleges Or
Schools (Limited Form) CG 22 71; Colleges Or Schools CG 22 72;
Professional Liability Exclusion—Computer Software CG 22 75;Professional Liability Exclusion—Health Or Exercise Clubs Or
Commercially Operated Health Or Exercise Facilities CG 22 76;
Professional Liability Exclusion—Computer Data Processing CG 22
77.
The following newly introduced multi-state endorsements:
Introduction Of Primary And Noncontributory—O ther Insurance
Condition Endorsement CG 20 01; Introduction of Additional Insured
—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—A utomatic Status For Other
Parties When Required In Written Construction Agreement CG 20 38;
Introduction Of Total Pollution Exclusion For Designated Products Or
Work Endorsement CG 21 99; Introduction Of Liquor Liability—B ring
Your Own Alcohol Establishments Endorsement CG 24 06;
Introduction Of Amendment Of Personal And Advertising Injury
Definition Endorsement CG 24 13; and Introduction Of Designated
Location(s) Aggregate Limit Endorsement CG 25 14.
The April 2013 ISO CGL forms are reproduced in this book, along
with prior CGL forms.
The eleventh edition encompasses all of the preceding information
and adds discussions of the ISO Commercial Liability Umbrella Policy
and the Commercial Excess Liability Coverage form. An umbrella
liability policy has a net effect of providing the insured with an
“umbrella” of liability protection over the insured’s primary liability
insurance.
The first chapter on umbrella coverage offers an introductory
discussion of commercial umbrella liability insurance. The next
chapter presents a general overview and analysis of the Commercial
Liability Umbrella Policy, CU 00 01 04 13. The last chapter has a
discussion and analysis of the Commercial Excess Liability Coverage
form, CX 00 01 04 13.These forms are reproduced in this book.
The twelfth edition of this coverage guide offers all of the
preceding information and adds some new chapters.
One of the new chapters deals with a comparison between the
CGL form and the BOP. Many insurers use the businessowners policy
(BOP) to convey the same coverages as the CGL form but with the
small to medium-sized business in mind. The BOP does offer
property coverage along with liability coverages but this chapter
analyzes the liability section of the BOP and contrasts it with the
coverages offered by the CGL form.
Another new chapter discusses many coverage issues that pertain
to the CGL form. Some examples are the pollution exclusion, the
meaning of occurrence, additional insureds, and the insurability of
punitive damages. These coverage issues and others are analyzed
along with pertinent court cases.
And speaking of court cases, another new chapter offers brief
synopses of judicial rulings from various jurisdictions relevant to
liability coverage disputes. These cases will allow the reader to
understand current legal thinking on coverage disputes that pit the
insurer against the insured.
Finally, two new appendices are included. Appendix H has charts
of state-by-state analysis of the current status of punitive damages,
liquor liability (dram shop laws), and premises liability. Appendix H
also contains a detailed analysis of the Liquor Liability exclusion.
Appendix I has checklists for both General Liability, as well as
Commercial Liability Umbrella, for the readers use to ensure that
liability risks are identified and properly addressed.Long considered the industry’s CGL gold-standard, the
Commercial General Liability Coverage Guide delivers discussions
supported by case law, practice-based examples that make the
analysis immediately applicable, an examination of the endorsements
that may be used to tailor coverage, and more.
For customer service questions or to place additional orders,
please call 1-800-543-0874.
Overview of CGL Coverage Forms
The current commercial general liability program consists of two
coverage forms and a multitude of endorsements. By combining a
coverage form and applicable endorsements with a declarations page
and the ISO common policy conditions form, an insurer assembles a
CGL coverage part that can be issued as a monoline policy or
combined with one or more other coverage parts (such as
commercial property, commercial crime, or inland marine) in a
commercial package policy.
The current CGL coverage forms, designated CG 00 01 and CG
00 02, differ from one another only with respect to their coverage
triggers. Form CG 00 01 has an occurrence trigger, whereas form
CG 00 02 has a claims-made trigger. Apart from their different
coverage triggers (which will be described in detail in this text), CG
00 01 and CG 00 02 are the same. Both forms provide the following
coverages:
•    Coverage A—Bodily Injury and Property Damage Liability
•    Coverage B—Personal and Advertising Injury Liability
•    Coverage C—Medical Payments
•    Supplementary Payments (applicable to Coverages A and B)In addition to the two CGL coverage forms, ISO maintains a
series of miscellaneous commercial liability coverage forms. These
forms can be used to provide the following coverages:
•    Owners and contractors protective liability
•    Liquor liability
•    Railroad protective liability
•    Products/completed operations liability
•    Pollution liability
Analysis of these forms is beyond the scope of this text.
Note on the Claims-Made Form
When the 1986 CGL coverage forms were first introduced, there
was a widespread fear, in the midst of the liability insurance crisis of
the mid-1980s, that insurers would offer only the claims-made form to
most insureds. Contrary to expectations, the claims-made form has
seen only limited use since its introduction. Despite the sparing use of
the claims-made form to date, this latest edition of Commercial
General Liability continues to devote a full chapter to management of
the claims-made form, for two reasons.
First, the claims-made form will always be used for some risks,
regardless of market conditions. Proper handling of the claims-made
form is a complex subject. Unless presented with sufficient
explanation, the subject cannot be adequately understood by those
who need to understand it.
Second, insurers may be more likely to use the claims-made form
if history repeats itself in the form of another liability insurance crisis.Many insurance and risk professionals who have not had to deal with
claims-made policies may need a thorough explanation of how to
handle the claims-made CGL coverage form.Chapter 1
Coverage A—Bodily Injury and
Property Damage Liability
Bodily injury and property damage liability coverage is provided as
Coverage A of the commercial general liability (CGL) coverage
forms. Coverage A consists of two sections: insuring agreement and
exclusions.
Insuring Agreement
Under the Coverage A insuring agreement, the insurer agrees to
pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as
damages because of bodily injury or property damage to which the
insurance applies. In addition, the bodily injury or property damage
must be caused by an occurrence that takes place in the coverage
territory. Each of the italicized terms above is discussed in more
detail in this chapter.
The insuring agreement also sets forth the coverage trigger that
applies to each form. Form CG 00 01 contains an occurrence trigger,
and CG 00 02 contains a claims-made trigger. The coverage triggers
of the CGL coverage forms are described briefly in this chapter; a
more detailed explanation of the coverage triggers is in Chapter 4.
While there are liability policies that are only activated when the
legal obligation to pay is determined by a court, such is not the case
with the standard CGL forms. Yet, there are differences of opinion. Ininsurance custom and practice, the phraseology “legally obligated to
pay” does not mean that adjudication can only be resolved by a court.
In fact, many insurers would prefer not to get involved in litigation
because the cost of defense often can far exceed the cost of
indemnity. On the other hand, there are cases, such as Bacon v.
American Insurance Co., 330 A.2d 389, (1974) where it was held
that the policy term “legally obligated to pay” required the
presentation of proofs in a court of competent jurisdiction and a
finding by the court or jury of liability.” The answer, therefore, is not
definitive.
Finally, the insuring agreement expresses the insurer’s duty to
defend the insured. Accordingly, this chapter describes the defense
coverage provided by Coverage A. Because of their logical
relationship to defense coverage, the supplementary payments
section of the CGL coverage forms is also described in this chapter.
The supplementary payments also apply to Coverage B, the subject
of Chapter 2.
Meaning of Legally Obligated
The expression legally obligated connotes legal responsibility that
is broad in scope. It is directed at civil liability, rather than criminal
liability, the latter being against public policy to insure. Civil liability can
arise from either unintentional (negligent) or intentional tort, under
common law, statute, or contract.
The Coverage A insuring agreement does not contain the
statement, found in the 1973 general liability policy, that the insurer
will “pay on behalf of the insured.” The absence of that language
should not, however, be taken to mean that the CGL coverage forms
are indemnity policies, that is, policies that pay the insured only after
the insured has paid the injured party. The current insuring agreement
does not use the word indemnify, nor does it express any requirementthat the insured must pay the injured party first. The insurer’s promise
to “pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay”
requires only that the insured have an obligation to pay.
“Damages Because of”
Damages comprise those sums of money that the law imposes as
compensation, such as medical and funeral expenses, loss of
services, lost wages, and pain and suffering resulting from bodily
injury, and repair bills and other forms of retribution for damage to
property or its loss of use. Unless otherwise prohibited by law,
damages may also include punitive damages. The fact that
“damages” is not defined in CGL policies has made it the focal point
in litigation dealing with environmental cleanup costs. Insureds have
maintained that the costs associated with remediating contamination
damage to property constitute damages. Insurers, on the other hand,
have maintained that the term in question embraces any legal
damages, or, in other words, the costs associated with actions at
law, rather than actions in equity. An action in equity seeks an
equitable remedy. For example, injunctive relief proceedings, one
form of action in equity, deal with the required performance or
prohibition of an act and therefore do not directly involve money
damages, but these proceedings do involve costs and expenses in
litigating them.
Yet the courts have interpreted damages in insurance policies
independently of the legal and equitable distinction that has been
asserted by insurers. Examples are nuisance actions, situations
involving the mitigation of damage to restore property, and actions
that have alleged a combination of injunctive relief and damages in an
otherwise covered claim or suit.1
The phraseology “damages because of,” as used in the CGL
policy insuring agreement, conveys a broad promise that issometimes overlooked. The pertinent part of the insuring agreement
in which this phraseology appears reads: “We will pay those sums
that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages
because of ‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ to which this insurance
applies.”
In light of this wording, all damages flowing as a consequence of
bodily injury or property damage would be encompassed by the
insurer’s promise, subject to any applicable exclusion or condition.
This includes purely economic damages, as long as they result from
otherwise covered bodily injury or property damage.
For example, absent some allegation of physical bodily harm
potentially covered by a liability policy, there may be no coverage for
allegations of emotional distress or mental anguish, depending on the
law of the jurisdiction involved. In fact, the debate over whether
emotional distress or mental anguish equates with bodily injury in the
absence of physical bodily harm has long persisted. However, if a
claimant sustains bodily injury or personal injury that is deemed to be
covered by the policy, there should be no question that all damages
for emotional distress or mental anguish flowing as a consequence
from the bodily injury or personal injury should also be covered.
Likewise, loss of investments or profits and goodwill are not
considered to be property damage, because the definition of property
damage requires physical injury to tangible property. However, these
damages, when associated with and flowing as a consequence of
otherwise covered property damage, would also be covered.
“Bodily Injury” and “Property Damage”
“Bodily injury,” as defined in the CGL coverage forms, remains
relatively unchanged from predecessor forms. It means:Bodily injury, sickness or disease sustained by a person,
including death resulting from any of these at any time.
It has been said that when “bodily injury” is stated to mean bodily
injury, it is an attempt to use words that need no further explanation,
and it would be an imposition on insurers to require them to provide
insureds with “an unnecessary lexicon” [Cotton States Mutual Ins. Co.
v. Crosby, 260 S.E.2d 860 (Ga. 1979)]. In its usual sense of the
word, however, bodily injury means hurt or harm to the human body
by contact of some force and any resulting pain and suffering,
sickness or disease, as well as death.
A definite uncertainty is whether bodily injury encompasses mental
or emotional harm. Some courts have held that the term “bodily injury”
is ambiguous and, therefore, includes emotional distress, whereas
others courts have rejected such arguments. Much will depend on the
facts. One thing for certain, however, is that there is no consensus.
But, if, as a result of bodily injury, mental or emotional injury follows
as a consequence, the liability policy generally covers such injury.
The definition of property damage has changed since introduction
of the 1986 forms. To understand the transition of this definition, it is
helpful to restate the definitions as they appeared in the 1986 forms
and again with the 1990 and subsequent editions.
1986 CGL Policy Definition
a.     Physical injury to tangible property, including all
resulting loss of use of that property; or
b.     Loss of use of tangible property that is not physically
injured.
Within Insuring Agreement 1.c. there is an additional explanation:“Property damage” that is loss of use of tangible property that is
not physically injured shall be deemed to occur at the time of the
“occurrence” that caused it.
1990 and subsequent editions of the CGL Policy
a.     Physical injury to tangible property, including all
resulting loss of use of that property. All such loss of
use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the
physical injury that caused it; or
b.     Loss of use of tangible property that is not physically
injured. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur
at the time of the “occurrence” that caused it.
Under the 1986 forms, loss of use of tangible property resulting
from physical injury to that tangible property is covered at any time it
occurs following the physical injury. So, for example, loss of use of
tangible property in 2002 resulting from physical injury to that tangible
property in 2000 would be covered by the 2000 policy under the
wording of Part (1) of the property damage definition in the 1986
policy. This application is reinforced by the fact that the CGL policy
also covers “damages because of” property damage and that loss of
use of tangible property physically injured, as a consequence, would
fall into that category.
This contrasts with the wording found in Part a. of the property
damage definition of the 1990 forms and as it exists today in
subsequent policy editions, where loss of use resulting from physical
injury to tangible property is deemed to occur at the time of the injury
that caused it. It has been said that injury or damage generally is
simultaneous with an occurrence, but that is not necessarily the case
in every instance. However, not to complicate matters, assume that
work was performed on a building in 2000. Defects in the
construction cause windows to leak, damaging some contents in2001. As a result of that physical injury to tangible property, there is
loss of use of that part of the building in 2002, while repairs are
pending and while repairs are being made. For purposes of applying
coverage, loss of use would relate back to the policy year 2001, the
date the water damage occurred.
In theory, there should be little difference in the application of
coverage between the 1986 and 1990 editions. However, by stating
under both of these editions that loss of use and the occurrence
causing it must take place during the policy period, coverage may be
difficult to ascertain or even be eliminated where the occurrence is in
one policy period and loss of use is in another.
Interestingly, the property damage definition wording of the 1986
and 1990 CGL forms, requiring that both the occurrence and the loss
of use occur during the policy period, produces a result similar in
some ways to the progressive injury exclusion (so-called Montrose
endorsements, named after the 1995 case of Montrose Chemical
Corp. v. Admiral Insurance Company, 913 P.2d 878) that is now part
of the standard CGL insuring agreements. The Montrose case and its
consequences will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4. However,
it needs to be mentioned here that the purpose of the progressive
injury exclusion is to preclude coverage in future policies for
continuous or progressive injury or damage once it is known to exist.
This is also the general idea behind the wording of the property
damage definition stating that the loss of use of tangible property is
deemed to occur at the time of the occurrence that caused it.
Reference to physical injury suggests that the tangible property
must sustain some form of visible harm or impairment. However, even
if loss or theft of property is not considered to be physical injury to
tangible property, the insured may still be able to recover on the
ground that there is “loss of use of tangible property not physically
injured.” For example, see Travelers Insurance Co. v. De Bothuri and
P.L.A. Inc., 465 So.2d 662 (Fla. App. 1985). A major coverageobstacle, however, is the damage to property exclusion j.(4) dealing
with property damage to personal property in the care, custody or
control of the insured. Depending on the facts, however, coverage is
still possible despite the exclusion. See Empire Associates, et al., v.
North River Ins. Co., 637 N.Y.S. 2d 417 (A.D. 1 Dept. 1996), where
the care, custody or control exclusion was held not to apply to theft of
jewelry from insureds’ tenant’s deposit box where the insureds did not
maintain duplicate keys to these boxes.
Some insurers now specifically exclude money, securities, and
other valuables from coverage under liability policies, or liability for
loss to tangible property from theft. If other courts were to follow the
decision of Advanced Network, Inc. v. Peerless Ins. Co., 119 Cal.
Rptr.3d 17 (2010), these kinds of exclusion might be unnecessary.
This was an action for damages for “loss of use” of property within
the meaning of a CGL policy. The insurer argued, and the court
agreed, that the replacement of cash stolen by the named insured’s
employee from one of its clients, a credit union, was not “loss of use”
but, instead, “loss of” the property and, therefore, not covered.
The 2001 revision of the CGL policy added the following language
to the definition of “property damage”:
For purposes of this insurance, electronic data is not
tangible property.
As used in this definition, electronic data means information,
facts or programs stored as or on, created or used on, or
transmitted to or from computer software, including systems and
applications software, hard or floppy disks, CD-ROMS, tapes,
drives, cells, data processing devices or any other media which
are used with electronically controlled equipment.
The tendency of some people to view computer data as intangible
property is rooted in the premise that tangible property must possesssome physical property capable of being touched, and they believe
that computer data does not exhibit such characteristics. However,
once information travels from thought process to a computer disk as
data, it can be viewed and edited and then printed onto paper or
conveyed via email or computergenerated facsimiles. From this
perspective, many insureds would view electronic data as being
tangible property.
Whether it was this perspective of insureds about viewing
electronic data as tangible property or the fact that a policy definition
is not an equivalent of an exclusion, ISO introduced a new exclusion,
designated as exclusion p. in the 2004 edition of the CGL coverage
form. This exclusion buttressed the intent that liability for loss of
electronic data, however caused, is not intended to be covered by the
basic policy provisions. Exclusion p. is discussed later in this chapter.
Caused by “Occurrence”
A basic requirement of both CG 00 01 and CG 00 02 is that the
bodily injury or property damage must be caused by an occurrence,
which both forms define as follows:
“Occurrence” means an accident, including continuous or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general
harmful conditions.
The definition of this term in the CGL coverage forms differs from
the definition in the 1973 policy. Reference in the 1973 policy to
“bodily injury or property damage neither expected nor intended from
the standpoint of the insured” does not appear in the current
definition. Instead, the current forms treat intentional harm through an
exclusion that is described later in this chapter. Reference to “the
same general harmful conditions” in the current definition is taken in
part from the limits of liability section of the 1973 policy, which reads:“For purposes of determining the limit of the company’s liability, all
bodily injury and property damage arising out of continuous or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general conditions shall
be considered as arising out of one occurrence.”
Despite the change in the wording of the occurrence definition, the
effect is intended to be the same as in the 1973 policy. Thus, whether
it can be said that bodily injury or property damage is caused by an
occurrence still hinges on fortuity. It does not matter whether the
event is sudden and definite in time or place, or one that is continuous
or repeated and difficult to pinpoint within a specific time-frame. What
really matters is whether the bodily injury or property damage results
without the insured’s foresight or anticipation.2
“Coverage Territory”
Under the CGL coverage forms, an occurrence must take place
within the coverage territory in order for bodily injury and property
damage to be covered under Coverage A, and an offense must take
place within the coverage territory in order for personal and
advertising injury to be covered under Coverage B. This is a
significant requirement, particularly with regard to products liability,
that did not apply to earlier editions. Thus, a trigger of coverage is
both where the occurrence happens and where the resulting injury or
damage occurs. It is obviously important, therefore, to understand the
meaning of “coverage territory.” Until the 2001 CGL revision,
“coverage territory” remained unchanged from when first introduced
in 1986. The 2001 changes primarily affect Coverage B—Personal
and Advertising Injury, to take into consideration the worldwide loss
exposures arising out of e-commerce.
“Coverage territory” means:
a.    The United States of America (including its territories
and possessions), Puerto Rico and Canada;b.    International waters or airspace, but only if the injury
or damage occurs in the course of travel or
transportation between any places included in a.
above; or
c.    All other parts of the world if the injury or damage
arises out of:
(1)    Goods or products made or sold by you in the
territory described in a. above;
(2)    The activities of a person whose home is in the
territory described in a. above, but is away for a
short time on your business; or
(3)    “Personal and advertising injury” offenses that
take place through the Internet or similar
electronic means of communication;
provided the insured’s responsibility to pay damages is
determined in a “suit” on the merits, in the territory
described in a. above or in a settlement we agree to.
The effects of the above definition are as follows:
•    Reference to injury in c. above is intended to include not only
bodily injury but also personal and advertising injury, the
subject of Coverage B.
•    Regarding products liability coverage, the coverage territory is
worldwide, provided (1) the goods or products are made or
sold by the named insured in the basic coverage territory, even
though sold for use or consumption abroad; (2) the occurrence
takes place in the covered territory; (3) bodily injury orproperty damage occurs during the policy period; and (4) is
caused by an occurrence. This means that if a defective
component product was made in a foreign country, and it was
determined that the occurrence happened there, no coverage
would apply under the CGL form for bodily injury or property
damage arising from that defective product, despite having
met the other preceding conditions. Conversely, if the
occurrence were determined to have happened at the time of
injury or damage, and the other conditions are met, coverage
should apply, unless an exclusion is applicable. See ACE
American Ins. Co., v. RC2 Corporation, Inc., et al., 600 F.3d
763 (2010), where the occurrence was determined to happen
in the U.S., rather than in China, but the foreign CGL policy
only applied to bodily injury or property damage taking place
outside of the U.S.
•    In contrast, the policy territory of the 1973 CGL policy
provided international coverage for products only if they were
sold for use or consumption in the basic coverage territory (the
United States, Puerto Rico, and Canada), but without the
additional requirement, unlike subsequent editions, that the
occurrence also must happen in the covered territory. Although
the 1986 and later CGL coverage forms provide a broader
territorial definition for overseas products than the 1973 policy
did, apart from the occurrence restriction, the insured who
makes or sells products for overseas use or consumption is
still likely to want broader coverage than that found in current
CGL forms to cover suits filed outside the basic coverage
territory. Those businesses involved in foreign exposures on a
limited basis may be able to expand their coverage with one of
three endorsements introduced in 2001 amending the
coverage territory, which are discussed in Chapter 6.
•    Although products and completed operations are combined for
purposes of defining the elements of the products-completed
operation hazard, completed operations are not covered on aworldwide basis. Like the 1973 CGL policy, the current CGL
forms do not cover injury or damage resulting from the
insured’s completed operations that occurs outside the basic
coverage territory.
•    The coverage territory for occurrences or offenses involving
the activities of a person for whose acts the insured may be
responsible is worldwide, provided the person’s home is within
the basic coverage territory (i.e., that part of the coverage
territory described in part a. above) and the person is away
only for a short time. In the case of Caci International
Incorporated, et al. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 566
F.3d 150 (4th Cir. 2009), the named insured argued that “short
time” being an undefined term was ambiguous and therefore
should be construed in its favor. In disagreeing, the court
stated that the word “short” has an ordinary everyday
meaning: “brief” or “lasting only a short period of time,” and
that travel outside the coverage territory for several weeks
would defy the common understanding of “short.” The court
added that “short time” naturally covered a brief, discrete
event, such as a several day business trip abroad.
•    While personal and advertising injury coverage requires that
the offense be committed in the coverage territory during the
policy period, the resulting injury has no territorial restriction.
For purposes of offenses taking place through the Internet, the
CGL policy’s territorial scope is worldwide. Likewise, personal
and advertising offenses committed by a person while in a
foreign jurisdiction are within the coverage territory so long as
that person resides in one of the places identified in part a.
•    Until the 2001 policy revision, the problem has been in
determining where an offense takes place if an injury is
sustained outside the coverage territory. Because the Internet
has no boundaries, finding an answer would have been
difficult, if not impossible. With the 2001 revision of thecoverage territory, the task of determining where the offense
takes place is no longer a concern. Coverage now applies, for
purposes of an offense involving personal and advertising
injury, because of the Internet or other similar electronic means
of communication, on a worldwide basis.
•    Although a certain amount of coverage is on a worldwide
basis, the insured’s responsibility to pay damages must be
determined in a suit on the merits in the basic coverage
territory. Whether it necessarily must be the original suit (a
requirement under the 1973 CGL policy) that is filed against
the insured is not readily apparent. A literal reading of the
policy wording reveals no such requirement. It therefore is
conceivable that a suit originally filed in a foreign country could
be dismissed (without prejudice) and refiled later in the
coverage territory.
•    Under pre-1986 CGL forms, there was a question whether
claims within foreign jurisdictions were covered. The basis for
that position is that the terms of the 1973 CGL policy stated
that the insurer may investigate and settle any such claim it
deemed expedient. If the claim materialized into a lawsuit then
arguably the original suit was required to be brought within the
policy territory.
In 1986 and subsequent editions of CGL forms, the insurer’s
obligation to investigate and settle claims is at the insurer’s discretion.
However, it would not be in the best interest of the insurer (and the
insured) if the insurer were to ignore the investigation of any claim
wherever it occurs. In fact, it could be construed as a failure on the
part of the insurer to mitigate damages arising from a claim. Thus, it
would appear that if an insurer decides to settle a claim outside the
coverage territory, the claim should be covered for at least three
reasons:1.    There is no specific policy provision that precludes such an
obligation;
2.    The insured’s legal obligation to pay damages can arise
from a claim or a suit; and
3.    The term “suit” is defined in 1986 and subsequent policy
editions, but the term “claim” is not defined in these policies
connoting a difference between the two.
Coverage Triggers
In form CG 00 01, Coverage A applies to bodily injury or property
damage that occurs during the policy period. This is the so-called
occurrence coverage trigger, also used in the 1973 CGL policy.
Simply stated, the policy in effect at the time injury or damage occurs
is the policy that covers resulting damages, even if a claim is not
made until long after the policy expires.
In form CG 00 02, Coverage A is subject to a claims-made
coverage trigger. Coverage applies only to injury or damage for which
a claim is first made during the policy period. In addition, the injury or
damage for which a claim is made must have occurred on or after the
retroactive date, if any, shown in the policy declarations.
Prior to introduction of form CG 00 02 in 1986, a claims-made
trigger had not been used in standard general liability forms. It was
added to CGL forms to give insurers an appropriate form for insuring
risks that could incur long-tail liability losses, that is, injury or damage
that does not result in a claim until long after the injury or damage
occurs. An example is a claim, made today, for injury that is
considered to have occurred when the claimant was exposed to the
insured’s product several years ago. Typically, an insurer does not
want to cover long-tail risks under an occurrence policy, because theinsurer will be liable for claims made at any later time due to injury or
damage that occurs during the policy period. Another problem (from
the insurer’s point of view) with the occurrence trigger is that injury
occurring over several years (as in the case of long-term exposure to
a substance such as asbestos) may be covered under all policies in
effect during those years, allowing the insured to stack the per-policy
limits.
In 1999, ISO introduced a mandatory endorsement (CG 00 57)
that modified the Coverage A insuring agreement of the occurrence
CGL form to eliminate coverage for injury or damage known to the
insured before the policy period began. The language of the
endorsement was incorporated in the occurrence form with the 2001
CGL revision. This language, commonly referred to as the Montrose
provision after a California court case, is discussed in Chapter 4 as
part of the provisions that define the occurrence coverage trigger.
In contrast with the operation of the occurrence trigger, when the
claims-made form is used, a claim is payable only under the policy in
effect when the claim is first made. Once that policy period ends, the
insurer will be aware of all claims it must pay under that policy, unless
additional claims are reported during an extended reporting period,
that is, an additional period for reporting of claims after the policy
period ends.
Despite the advantages of claims-made coverage to insurers, it is
generally avoided by insureds. In fact, apart from the excess and
surplus lines markets, the ISO claims-made forms are not widely
used, presumably in part because of the generous five-year tail
coverage which is available. Because of the retroactive date and the
various options for extended reporting periods, arranging claims-
made coverage is often complicated and can result in coverage gaps.
Accordingly, an in-depth explanation of the claims-made trigger
(which also applies to Coverage B of the 1990 and 1993 versions of
form CG 00 02) is provided in Chapter 4 of this text.Duty to Defend—Allocation
It has been a well-known fact since the introduction of standard
general liability policy provisions in 1941 that the duty to defend is
broader than the duty to pay. Insurers, in other words, have been
required to defend the insured against all allegations and assume the
costs of defense for even those allegations clearly not covered by the
policy. In fact, these earlier policies, until the 1986 forms were
introduced, stated that the insurer’s duty to defend applied “even if
any of the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or fraudulent.”
When the standard ISO 1986 forms were introduced, the insurer’s
right and duty to defend was stated this way:
We will have the right and duty to defend the insured
against any “suit” seeking those damages. . We may at
our discretion investigate any “occurrence” and settle any
claim or “suit” that may result ….
The above wording remains to this very day despite numerous
revisions to the forms. However, what may have been overlooked
with the introduction of the 1986 forms was the elimination of the
phraseology “groundless, false or fraudulent.” It was mentioned in this
text in the early editions that, while that explicit statement no longer
appeared in current CGL forms, it would not matter since the insurer
still has “the right and duty to defend the insured against any ‘suit’
seeking damages.” If “any” is given its literal meaning, the statement
should encompass groundless, false, or fraudulent suits as well as
legitimate ones. Thus, absence of the prior wording should not be
interpreted to mean that the insurer was relieved of the duty to
defend groundless, false, or fraudulent suits against the insured.3
Of course, the complaint must have contained at least one
allegation that was potentially within coverage. It was not necessarythat all of the allegations came within the scope of coverage. It
became generally recognized that if some part of the damages
sought were covered, the insurer had to defend, but had no obligation
to pay damages not covered by the policy.
There has been continuous dialogue over the years that defense
costs far exceeded the payment of damages and that something had
to be done about it. One of the approaches to reducing the costs of
defense espoused by insurers was allocation. This comes as no
surprise for those insurers that feel that all claims need to be
adjudicated by the courts, instead of paid when coverage appears to
be applicable. This concept of allocating defense costs between
covered and noncovered claims has been around for many years.
Directors and officers liability policies, for example, have long sought
to allocate defense costs between covered and noncovered claims.
What may have encouraged insurers to allocate defense costs
between covered and noncovered claims was the case of United
States v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 601 F.2d 1136 (10th
Cir. 1979). This case dealt with an architectural and engineering firm
that purchased a CGL policy subject to a professional services
exclusion. When two suits were filed in 1971 against the firm alleging
bodily injuries resulting from the performance of professional
services, the CGL insurer denied both defense and coverage.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit held that the insurer
was obligated to defend its insured because it was unclear whether
the exclusion of professional services applied to the duty to defend as
well as to the duty to pay. The court explained that “if the insurance
company wants to protect itself in this type of situation, it should be
clearly stated that the exclusion clause applies to both the duty to pay
and the duty to defend.”Citing the above case, ISO issued a memorandum in 1991
advising insurers that if they do not want to defend a suit alleging
damages not covered by the policy, they should clearly state their
intentions in the policy. As a result, insurers began to issue
endorsements with wording attempting to make this subject clear. It
was not until the 1996 CGL policy revisions that the following specific
wording first appeared within the insuring agreement of standard
forms:
However, we will have no duty to defend the insured
against any “suit” seeking damages for “bodily injury” or
“property damage” to which this insurance does not apply.
On its face, this wording may not appear to limit the defense
obligation since case law still requires that the insurer defend the
entire action if even one cause of action is potentially covered. As a
result, some insurers began to also reserve their right of
reimbursement of defense costs. Some courts, however, have held
that if an insurer desires reimbursement of such costs in defending
suits that have no potential for coverage, the issuance of a
reservation of rights is insufficient. One such case where the court
held that an insurer was not entitled to be reimbursed for defense
costs, absent an express provision in the insurance policy is
American Foreign Insurance Co., et al. v. Jerry’s Sport Center, Inc.,
2A.3d 526 (Pa.2010).
To combat these kinds of court decisions, ISO has made available
Interline endorsements dealing with defense costs in Illinois (IL 01 62)
and Wyoming (IL 01 14). Entitled Changes—D efense Costs, these
endorsements state that if an insurer provides defense and later
determines that any allegations are not covered, it has a right of
reimbursement. This right of reimbursement, however, applies only to
defense costs incurred after the insured has been notified by a
reservation of rights that there may not be coverage, and that theinsurer is reserving its rights to terminate defense and to seek
reimbursement of the defense costs incurred.4
These revisions by ISO indicate an intent to pursue the right to
allocate dating back to its deletion in 1986 of the “groundless, false,
or fraudulent” wording.
One of the commonly cited cases upholding allocation in an
insurer’s favor is Buss v. The Superior Court of Los Angeles County,
939 P.2d 766 (1997). This case is not a good one to rely on because
of all the allegations cited, only one allegation was potentially
covered. The CGL policy also did not contain the wording above that
was introduced by ISO in its 1996 CGL forms. However, the insurer
did include in its reservation of rights a statement to the effect that
the insurer expressly reserves its rights to be “reimbursed and/or an
allocation of attorneys’ fees and expenses,” if it were determined that
there was no coverage under the policy. Also, the attorney defending
the case was instructed by the insurer to keep specific records of
time allocable to the covered claim as opposed to the claims not
covered.
In this case, the court held that with respect to claims for which
there never was any potential for coverage, the insurer could recover
costs shown by a preponderance of evidence to be fairly reasonably
allocable solely to the noncovered claim or claims. The court also
held that an insurer’s unilateral reservation of rights to recoup
defense costs could not, in absence of policy wording to that effect,
justify a claim for the recovery of such costs prior to a determination
of noncoverage. This is an important point, because of the policy
language introduced by ISO in 1996. In policies expressly stating that
there is no defense obligation for claims not covered by the policy
and omitting the “groundless, false, or fraudulent” wording found in
earlier policies, there now seems to be an argument for the allocation
of defense costs expended on noncovered claims even before a case
is over, subject to possible arguments of ambiguity in policy wording.What has been discussed here relative to Coverage A—Bodily
Injury and Property Damage Liability also applies to Coverage B—
Personal and Advertising Injury Liability.
Relationship of Defense Costs to Limits of Insurance
The defense provisions stated above are followed by two
conditions. The first of these states that “the amount [the insurer] will
pay for damages is limited as described in Section III—Limits of
Insurance.” Although the various limits of insurance that apply to the
CGL coverage forms will be discussed in Chapter 5, a key point of
this condition is that policy limits are applicable only to damages.
Thus, all other covered costs in connection with a covered claim
against the insured, including expenses incurred to defend the
insured, are payable in addition to the applicable limits of insurance.
The second condition states that the insurer’s “right and duty to
defend end when we have used up the applicable limit of insurance in
the payment of judgments or settlements under Coverage A or B or
medical expenses under Coverage C.” As noted above, the limits of
insurance apply only to damages; all other costs, including defense,
are payable in addition to the limits. However, once the applicable
limit of insurance has been paid, the insurer’s duty to defend is
intended to cease.
There is one notable exception to the fact that defense costs are
payable in addition to policy limits. First introduced with the 1992 and
1996 revisions, and now applying to all subsequent policy editions, is
the statement, as part of the contractual liability exclusion, that the
insurer will pay defense costs that the insured assumes under an
insured contract. However, any payment the insurer makes for
defense costs assumed under contract are payable within the
applicable limits of insurance. To reinforce this provision, the defense
provisions in the 1992 and 1996 forms state that the insurer has theright and duty to defend only the insured against suits seeking
covered damages. Prior editions stated that the insurer had the right
and duty to defend any suit seeking damages covered under the
policy. The coverage for defense costs assumed under contract is
discussed in more detail later in this chapter in connection with the
contractual liability exclusion.
Definition of “Suit”
The word “suit” in the defense provision was first defined in the
1986 policy provisions. In the 1992 and 1996 amendments, the
definition of suit was broadened to include arbitration proceedings
and other alternative dispute resolution proceedings to which any
insured—not just the named insured—submits. The latest version
reads as follows:
Suit” means a civil proceeding in which damages because
of “bodily injury”, “property damage” or “personal and
advertising injury” to which this insurance applies are
alleged. “Suit” includes:
a.     An arbitration proceeding in which such damages are
claimed and to which the insured must submit or does
submit with our consent; or
b.     Any other alternative dispute resolution proceeding in
which such damages are claimed and to which the
insured submits with our consent.
One reason why the definition of suit was introduced was to
encompass arbitration proceedings and other techniques for resolving
disputes, such as minitrials and pretrial mediations. These techniques,
advocated by insurers as a less costly alternative to court
proceedings, have become increasingly popular ways to resolve
claims against the insured.Another possible reason for adding the definition of suit was to
preclude coverage for insureds seeking protection under their CGL
policies following receipt of notice from a governmental agency that
they were potentially responsible parties to an environmental incident.
Such notice is commonly referred to as a PRP letter. Insurers have
maintained that a PRP letter or other notice is not the equivalent of a
lawsuit and therefore have denied insureds the benefit of any
defense. The courts, however, are split on this subject. Adding the
definition of suit appears to be the method chosen to end those kinds
of disputes.
Supplementary Payments
Closely related to the insurer’s duty to defend are the
supplementary payments that the insurer promises to make in
addition to paying damages. These payments, which apply to both
Coverage A and Coverage B, are expressed in the 2007 CGL forms
as follows:
We will pay, with respect to any claim we investigate or settle, or
any “suit” against an insured we defend:
a.    All expenses we incur.
b.    Up to $250 for cost of bail bonds required because of
accidents or traffic law violations arising out of the use of
any vehicle to which the Bodily Injury Liability Coverage
applies. We do not have to furnish these bonds.
c.    The cost of bonds to release attachments, but only for bond
amounts within the applicable limit of insurance. We do not
have to furnish these bonds.
d.    All reasonable expenses incurred by the insured at our
request to assist us in the investigation or defense of theclaim or “suit”, including actual loss of earnings up to $250 a
day because of time off from work.
e.    All court costs taxed against the insured in the “suit”.
However, these payments do not include attorneys’ fees or
attorneys’ expenses taxed against the insured.
f.     Prejudgment interest awarded against the insured on that
part of the judgment we pay. If we make an offer to pay the
applicable limit of insurance, we will not pay any
prejudgment interest based on that period of time after the
offer.
g.    All interest on the full amount of any judgment that accrues
after entry of the judgment and before we have paid, offered
to pay, or deposited in court the part of the judgment that is
within the applicable limit of insurance. These payments will
not reduce the limits of insurance.
In most respects, these supplementary payments provisions are
the same, in effect, as those of the 1973 general liability policy. The
few differences are noted below.
Unlike the 1973 version, the current supplementary payments do
not include coverage for expenses incurred by the named insured for
first aid to others at the time of an accident. However, the medical
payments section of the current forms does specifically cover
reasonable expenses for first aid administered at the time of an
accident. A difference between the two ways of covering first aid
expenses is that the current approach requires the insured to have
purchased medical payments coverage, while the old approach
provides the coverage automatically, as long as the insured has
liability coverage.Moreover, under the current forms, the payment of first aid
expenses reduces the applicable limits of liability, whereas the 1973
provision applied in addition to policy limits. The applicable limits of
liability with respect to the current medical payments coverage are a
per-person limit applicable only to medical payments, an each
occurrence limit for both medical payments and bodily injury/property
damage liability, and a “general aggregate” limit. (These limits are
described more thoroughly in Chapter 5.)
The loss of earnings provision allows up to $250 per day for loss
of earnings because of time off from work. The loss of earnings
provision in the 1973 form limited recovery to $25 per day. The 1986,
1990, and 1993 CGL forms limit recovery to $100 per day.
Paragraph e. of the supplementary payments section pertains to
costs taxed against the insured. Previous editions of the CGL forms
simply declared that supplementary payments included “all costs
taxed against the insured in the suit.” The December 2007 edition
now states that “all court costs taxed against the insured in the suit”
are considered supplementary payments. Moreover, the revised form
declares that “these payments do not include attorneys’ fees or
attorneys’ expenses taxed against the insured.” What this means is
that the attorneys’ fees and expenses of opposing counsel that may
be taxed against the insured, such as is common with civil rights suits,
are not covered. What insurers maintain they intend to cover under
the supplementary payments provision are the costs of defense,
including fees and expenses of the attorney selected by the insurer to
handle the defense of the insured.
Considering that opposing attorneys’ fees and expenses taxed
against insureds are being held as covered by the courts, this change
would appear to be a restriction as opposed to the provision being
replaced. The problem for insurers is that by excluding opposing
attorneys’ fees and attorneys’ expenses as supplementary payments,
it simply means that these fees and expenses will be viewed byinsureds and some courts as damages the insurer is legally obligated
to pay because of injury or property damage.
The current provision respecting interest on judgments applies not
only to interest accruing after entry of the judgment but also to
prejudgment interest awarded against the insured. Until 1984, when
ISO introduced in many states an amendatory endorsement for
general liability forms providing prejudgment interest coverage,
standard liability forms provided for postjudgment interest only.
The current supplementary payments provisions are silent as to
the cost of premiums on appeal bonds required in any suit defended
by the insurer, an item that was specifically covered under the 1973
provisions. The absence of a provision regarding appeal bonds should
probably not be construed as an indication that the CGL coverage
forms relieve the insurer of the obligation to pay for appeal bonds in
all cases. And, more importantly, the absence of an appeal bond
provision should not be interpreted as relieving the insurer of the duty
to pursue an appeal if there are reasonable grounds for an appeal.
A case in point is Cathay Mortuary (Wah Sang), Inc. v. United
Pacific Ins. Co., 582 F. Supp. 650 (N.D. Cal. 1984). In this case a
United States district court held that “there is a general consensus
that an insurer is obligated to pursue an appeal on behalf of its
insured where there are reasonable grounds for appeal.” Moreover,
the court held that the insurer’s duty to pursue post-trial remedies,
including appeal, was “part and parcel of the general duty to defend,”
and was not attributable to the provision regarding payment for the
cost of appeal bonds.
Consequently, if an insurer, under the current forms, is obliged to
pursue an appeal by virtue of its general duty to defend, payment for
appeal bonds required in conjunction with that appeal would seem tobe inseparable from the insurer’s duty to pay for the other costs
associated with the appeal.
An insurer’s failure to pursue an appeal when there are
reasonable grounds for appeal can subject the insurer “to liability for
both the costs of defense and any adverse judgment the insured
suffers, even when the judgment was rendered on a theory not within
the policy coverage.” (Kapelus v. United Title Guarantee Co., 93 Cal.
Rptr. 278 (1971), as quoted in the Cathay Mortuary case.)
Defense of the Indemnitee Costs within or Outside the
Policy Limit?
In 1992, ISO proposed that the defense costs assumed under an
“insured contract” would be considered damages and therefore
payable as part of the policy limit, rather than in addition to the limit of
insurance. ISO also proposed that the insurer express no right or
duty to defend the indemnitee, the person or organization whose
liability is being assumed under contract by the insured (who is the
indemnitor). This proposal created a great deal of controversy. In
fact, not all insurers implemented this proposal but instead continued
to defend the indemnitee in order to maintain some control over the
suit.
In the 1996 CGL revision, new provisions were inserted into the
Supplementary Payments provision of the CGL and other coverage
forms. These provisions provide that, if the indemnitee and the
insured ask the insurer to conduct and control the defense of the
indemnitee, the insurer will defend an indemnitee of the insured if the
indemnitee is named in a suit against the insured, and pay the
defense costs of the indemnitee in addition to the policy’s limit of
insurance, if the following conditions are met:1.    The suit against the insured also names an indemnitee of
the insured as a party to the suit.
2.    The suit against the indemnitee must seek damages for
which the insured has assumed liability in an “insured
contract.”
3.    The insurance provided under the policy applies to such
liability assumed by the insured.
4.    The obligation to defend, or the cost of the defense of, the
indemnitee has also been assumed by the insured in the
same contract.
5.    The allegations in the suit and information known about the
occurrence are such that no conflict appears to exist
between the insured’s interests and the indemnitee’s
interests. The indemnitee and the insured must agree that
the insurer can assign the same counsel to defend both
parties.
6.    The indemnitee agrees in writing to:
a.    cooperate with the insurer in the investigation,
settlement or defense of the suit;
b.    immediately send the insurer copies of any demands,
notices, summonses or legal papers received in
connection with the suit;
c.    notify any other insurer whose coverage is available to
the indemnitee;
d.    cooperate with the insurer in coordinating other
applicable insurance available to the indemnitee; ande.    provide the insurer with written authorization to: (i)
obtain records and other information related to the suit;
and (ii) conduct and control the defense of the
indemnitee in such suit.
Legal costs unquestionably have become an increasingly heavy
burden on insurance companies and often represent a highly
disproportionate amount compared to the damages payable by the
insurer. It therefore is understandable that insurers are seeking ways
to reduce these kinds of costs. But these conditions create so many
obstacles that this particular approach is destined for failure.
The question is what the effect is if one of the conditions is not
met. It should be pointed out that there are many ways in which these
conditions will not be met. One of the common ways involves so-
called third-party-over actions (discussed under Exclusion E—
Employers Liability later in this chapter) where indemnitees, alone,
are the ones named in a suit. Also, it is not unusual to find a dispute
between the indemnitor and indemnitee as to the degree of liability
assumed. Adversarial relationships are common. In any event, if one
of the above conditions is not met, the answer to the question is that
defense costs assumed by the indemnitor (insured) in an insured
contract, assuming coverage otherwise applies, will be paid subject
to the policy’s limit of insurance, and not in addition to the limits of
insurance. The provisions of the CGL form that describe the coverage
for defense costs assumed under an insured contract are described
later in this chapter, under Exclusion B—Contractual Liability.
In a growing number of instances, hold harmless and indemnity
agreements are reinforced by additional insured endorsements.
Assuming the proper endorsement is attached to the named insured’s
(indemnitor’s) CGL policy and applies in a given claim or suit, the
foregoing conditions dealing with defense costs within limits may not
be applicable. The reason is that, at least from the standpoint of
defense for additional insureds, defense costs are in addition topolicy limits. One of the exceptions where additional insured status
may not solve this issue is when the hold harmless and indemnity
agreement is broader in scope than the additional insured
endorsement. The rule is that the indemnitee is to be provided the
broader of the two coverages, that is, contractual liability or additional
insured status.
The reason contractual liability coverage may be broader than
additional insured coverage is that under ISO additional insured
endorsements, at least, the most coverage the additional insured can
obtain is for partial fault. This is so, because the additional insured
endorsement hinges on coverage where injury or damage is caused
in whole or in part by the named insured’s acts or omissions.
Contractual liability coverage, on the other hand, can cover even the
sole fault of the indemnitee (additional insured), if no limitation
endorsement, i.e., CG 21 39 or CG 24 26.is attached. Whether sole
fault coverage is permitted, however, depends on the applicable anti-
indemnity statute. Many such statutes hold both sole and partial
negligence to be void and unenforceable but do not affect the validity
of insurance. Both the additional insured endorsements and the
contractual liability limitation endorsements are discussed in Chapter
6.
Exclusions
The bodily injury and property damage liability insurance provided
in Coverage A of the CGL coverage forms is subject to several
exclusions. With some important exceptions, these exclusions achieve
the same effect as the exclusions found in the 1973 general liability
policy and relevant portions of the broad form comprehensive general
liability endorsement. For example, the watercraft exclusion of the
current CGL coverage forms contains an exception providing
coverage for nonowned boats less than twenty-six feet long, which
was previously expressed as a separate coverage in the broad form
liability endorsement. Similarly, many of the former broad formproperty damage provisions are incorporated into the current
exclusions instead of being stated in a separate endorsement.
The most significant items found in the current exclusions are an
almost total exclusion of pollution liability, clarifications and
liberalizations in the scope of property damage coverage with respect
to the insured’s work or products, and amendments in contractual
liability coverage. These and other changes in the exclusions are
discussed in the order in which the exclusions appear in the CGL
coverage forms.
In the 1993 and later editions of the CGL forms, all of the
Coverage A exclusions carry a descriptive title. For example,
exclusion a. is entitled “Expected or Intended Injury.” This change
may have helped to clarify that it is not an intentional act that is
excluded, but rather an intentional injury or result of such act. The
titles of the other exclusions are included in the subheadings that
follow.
Exclusion A—Expected or Intended Injury
Exclusion a. of the CGL coverage forms is derived from the 1973
form’s definition of occurrence and from the extended bodily injury
coverage of the broad form CGL endorsement. The current exclusion
reads as follows:
This insurance does not apply to:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” expected or intended
from the standpoint of the insured. This exclusion does not
apply to “bodily injury” resulting from the use of reasonable
force to protect persons or property.It might appear that the term occurrence in the insuring agreement
of the CGL coverage forms would be sufficient to preclude coverage
for such claims or suits as are excluded here, especially if occurrence
is interpreted to include fortuitous events only. The exclusion,
however, clarifies that deliberate or intentionally caused bodily injury
or property damage is not deemed to be accidental.
As noted above, it is the intentional injury, rather than the
intentional act, that is excluded. This exclusion therefore does not rule
out protection of an insured who commits an intentional act, unless it
can be proved that the consequences of the act could have been
expected. In many cases, it is likely to be a question of fact for a
court to decide, unless the insurance company’s investigation reveals
solid ground on which to pay or deny the claim.
The exception to this exclusion duplicates the extended bodily
injury coverage of the broad form liability endorsement. While it may
be recognized that a person has the right to use reasonable force to
protect his or her person or property, this exception grants an
important clarification of coverage. Although coverage may apply in
absence of the clarification, the insurer is less likely to deny coverage
for a claim or suit alleging such an intentional act when the policy
specifically provides coverage. This does not mean that coverage will
be granted automatically. The bodily injury must have been prompted
by a threat of harm and must have resulted from the exercise of
reasonable force. What is reasonable will depend on the
circumstances. (Note that the exception does not include property
damage resulting from the use of reasonable force.)
Exclusion B—Contractual Liability
Exclusion b. approximates the blanket contractual liability
coverage available under the broad form general liability endorsement
formerly added to the 1973 general liability policy. By use of anendorsement (CG 21 39), the scope of contractual liability coverage
under the current CGL coverage forms can be reduced to the
incidental contracts coverage provided under the 1973 policy without
the broad form endorsement.
The current version of exclusion b. reads:
This insurance does not apply to:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” for which the insured
is obligated to pay damages by reason of the assumption
of liability in a contract or agreement. This exclusion does
not apply to liability for damages:
(1)    That the insured would have in the absence of the
contract or agreement; or
(2)    Assumed in a contract or agreement that is an
“insured contract”, provided the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” occurs subsequent to the
execution of the contract or agreement. Solely for
the purposes of liability assumed in an “insured
contract”, reasonable attorney fees and necessary
litigation expenses incurred by or for a party other
than an insured are deemed to be damages because
of “bodily injury” or “property damage”, provided:
(a)     Liability to such party for, or for the cost of,
that party’s defense has also been assumed in
the same “insured contract”; and
(b)     Such attorney fees and litigation expenses are
for defense of that party against a civil or
alternative dispute resolution proceeding in
which damages to which this insurance applies
are alleged.An addition to exception (2) above, providing payment of defense
expenses for which the insured has assumed liability in an insured
contract, is discussed under the section entitled “Defense of the
Indemnitee Costs Within or Outside the Policy Limit?”
Liability in Absence of Contract
The contractual liability exclusion clearly states that it does not
apply if the insured would be liable for damages in the absence of
any contract or agreement. This exception makes coverage certain in
situations that would otherwise be a source of conflict between
insurance companies and their insureds.
An example is an insured contractor who agrees to hold harmless
and indemnify a railroad owner for any bodily injury or property
damage arising out of the project, regardless of whether the
contractor is otherwise liable. This is not an insured contract if such
injury occurs within fifty feet of the railroad, due to the railroad
protective exclusion (discussed later in these pages). However, if the
insured would have been liable in absence of the contract—that is,
the insured’s own negligence caused the accident—the insured will
nevertheless be covered, in spite of the railroad protective exclusion.
Meaning of “Insured Contract”
The second exception to the contractual liability exclusion states
that the exclusion does not apply to liability assumed under an
“insured contract.” The definition of insured contract includes the
following:
a.    A contract for a lease of premises. However, that portion of
the contract for a lease of premises that indemnifies any
person or organization for damage by fire to premises whilerented to you or temporarily occupied by you with
permission of the owner is not an “insured contract”;
b.    A sidetrack agreement;
c.    Any easement or license agreement, except in connection
with construction or demolition operations on or within 50
feet of a railroad;
d.    An obligation, as required by ordinance, to indemnify a
municipality except in connection with work for a
municipality;
e.    An elevator maintenance agreement;
f.     That part of any other contract or agreement pertaining to
your business (including an indemnification of a municipality
in connection with work performed for a municipality) under
which you assume the tort liability of another to pay
damages because of “bodily injury” or “property damage” to
a third person or organization. Tort liability means a liability
that would be imposed by law in absence of any contract or
agreement.
The contracts itemized in parts a. through e. are comparable to
the definition of incidental contract in the 1973 general liability policy
(without the broad form endorsement), except that the definition in the
1986 and later versions of the CGL form does not require that the
contract be in writing. Thus, the 1986 and later editions of the CGL
form cover both written and oral agreements. However, the 1990 and
later editions require that the insured contract must have been
executed before the bodily injury or property damage occurred.
Despite this requirement, court decisions go both ways.Items a. through e. do not limit insured contracts to those under
which the named insured assumes the liability of another. They, of
course, can involve tort liability assumed but that is not mandatory.
Thus, the CGL forms cover liability assumed by any insured under a
contract described in items a. through e. However, coverage for any
contract of a type not described in items a. through e. is restricted to
the named insured’s assumption of another entity’s tort liability, that
is, “a liability that would be imposed by law [on the other entity] in the
absence of any contract or agreement.”
The restriction of item f. to assumptions of the tort liability of
another may be intended to strengthen the position, affirmed by a
number of courts, that “liability assumed by the insured under any
contract refers to liability incurred when one promises to indemnify or
hold harmless another, and does not refer to liability that results from
breach of contract” [as stated by the Alaska Supreme Court in
Olympic, Inc. v. Providence Washington Ins. Co., 648 P.2d 1008
(Alaska 1982)]. The failure of an insured to have the CGL policy
endorsed to name an additional insured as promised by contract is an
example of a breach of contract. However, it is possible not only for
the same act to constitute both a breach of contract and a tort but
also for an allegation of breach of contract to be brought about by
tort and be covered by the policy. See, for example, the landmark
case of Vandenberg v. Superior Court of Sacramento County, 88
Cal. Rptr. 2d 366 (1999). (In this case, the breach of contract was
claimed to have caused property damage.)
An important and often misunderstood point is that part d. above
allows coverage of obligations to indemnify a municipality as required
by ordinance. For example, a contractor constructing sidewalks for
the owner of property in a particular city may be required by
ordinance to indemnify the city for claims made against the city for
injury arising in some way from the contractor’s work. The
contractor’s obligation to indemnify the city is covered under this
provision unless the work is being performed for the city. But, even ifthe work is being performed for the city, the insured may still have
coverage for the obligation by virtue of part f. of the definition. Since
the 1990 revisions, part f. specifically includes “an indemnification of a
municipality in connection with work performed for a municipality,” as
long as the obligation is an assumption of the municipality’s tort
liability to pay damages because of bodily injury or property damage
to a third party.
Since an escalator is not an elevator, the question is how are
contracts involving the assumption of liability for their maintenance
handled? If the owner of an escalator assumes the sole or partial tort
liability of a company that maintains escalators, coverage would apply
under item f., assuming the assumption is not otherwise void and
unenforceable under any anti-indemnity statute. If no tort liability is
assumed, however, coverage would apply as a premises-operations
hazard.
What “Insured Contract” Does Not Include
Following item f. of the definition of “insured contract” are the
exclusions shown below.
Paragraph f. does not include that part of any contract or
agreement:
(1)    That indemnifies a railroad for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” arising out of construction or demolition
operations, within 50 feet of any railroad property and
affecting any railroad bridge or trestle, tracks, roadbeds,
tunnel, underpass or crossing;
(2)    That indemnifies an architect, engineer or surveyor for
injury or damage arising out of:(a)    Preparing, approving, or failing to prepare or
approve maps, shop drawings, opinions, reports,
surveys, field orders, change orders, or drawings and
specifications; or
(b)    Giving directions or instructions, or failing to give
them, if that is the primary cause of the injury or
damage;
(3)    Under which the insured, if an architect, engineer or
surveyor, assumes liability for injury or damage arising out
of the insured’s rendering or failing to render professional
services, including those listed in (2) above and
supervisory, inspection, architectural or engineering
activities.
The 1986 and 1990 editions of the CGL form also exclude “that
part of any contract or agreement … That indemnifies any person or
organization for damage by fire to premises rented or loaned to you.”
In the 1993 and later editions of the policy, a comparable exclusion is
located under item a. (pertaining to leases of premises) of the
definition of insured contract. In either case, the purpose is to clarify
that contractual liability coverage does not apply to the exposure
covered by fire damage legal liability coverage, which (as discussed
later in this chapter) is subject to a separate limit of insurance rather
than the full each occurrence limit.
Railroad Protective Exclusion
Railroad companies frequently require contractors or others who
are to perform work on, above, or otherwise within fifty feet of the
railroad to hold the railroad company harmless for any claims or suits
that may arise in connection with the work, even if the contractor
would not otherwise be liable. Item (1) of the above clauses,
sometimes called the railroad protective liability exclusion, expressesthe insurer’s intent not to cover liability arising under such hold
harmless agreements (unless the insured would have been liable in
the absence of the agreement, as stated under the contractual
liability exclusion).
Although the same exposure is addressed in item c. of the
definition of insured contract, that provision relates only to easement
or license agreements. The provision expressed in item (1) above
applies only to contracts described in item f. of the definition of
insured contract.
(Note that in the 1986 and 1990 editions of the CGL coverage
forms, the railroad protective exclusion applied to that part of a
contract that indemnifies any person or organization, rather than just
a railroad, as in later editions). Whenever work is conducted on or
within the proximity of railroad property, the railroad owner will likely
impose a broad indemnification agreement and require the contractor
to procure a separate railroad protective liability policy for the benefit
of the railroad. Even if a separate railroad protective liability policy is
purchased by the contractor for the railroad, the contractor should
still seek to have paragraph (1) deleted from its CGL policy, if
possible. The reason is to protect the contractor in the event the
insurer providing the railroad protective policy decides to bring a
subrogation action against the insured.
Subrogation against the contractor buying the railroad protective
policy for the benefit of the railroad may appear to be a remote
possibility, but it happened under an owners and contractors
protective liability (OCP) policy (which is similar in many ways to the
railroad protective policy) in the case of Rome v. Commonwealth
Edison Co., 401 N.E.2d 1032 (Ill. App. 1980). An Illinois court
permitted the OCP insurer to subrogate against the contractor who
purchased the OCP policy for the project owner because the parties
did not agree that the insurance would satisfy the obligation to
indemnify.As a general rule, an insurer cannot subrogate against its own
insured. Thus, it may be difficult for the insurer of the railroad
protective policy to subrogate against the contractor who purchases
the policy for the railroad if the same insurer also writes the
contractor’s CGL insurance. However, many insurers do not issue
railroad protective liability policies, even though a standard ISO
coverage form is available (CG 00 35). Thus, the insurer providing the
railroad protective policy may be different from the insurer providing
the contractor’s CGL insurance, opening the door to a subrogation
action against the insured contractor.
Deletion of the railroad protective exclusion is therefore
recommended whenever an insured is required (1) to purchase a
railroad protective liability policy; (2) to sign an indemnification
agreement with a railroad; or (3) to fulfill both of the preceding items.
Endorsement CG 24 17, Contractual Liability—R ailroads, is the ISO
endorsement for effecting this change. This endorsement provides
coverage if the railroad requires the assumption of tort liability based
on its sole fault. In 2005, ISO introduced endorsement CG 24 27
Limited Contractual Liability—R ailroads. This reduces the sole
negligence coverage of the railroad to coverage for injury or damage
caused in whole or in part by the named insured or those acting on its
behalf.
Professional Liability Exclusion
The exclusions contained in clauses (2) and (3) are both aimed at
eliminating contractual liability coverage for injury or damage resulting
from professional errors or omissions of architects, engineers, or
surveyors.
•    Clause (2) excludes coverage when the insured (who may or
may not be an architect, engineer, or surveyor) agrees to
indemnify an architect, engineer, or surveyor for injury or
damage arising out of the itemized services.•    Clause (3) excludes coverage when the insured is an
architect, engineer, or surveyor and assumes liability for injury
or damage arising out of its rendering or failure to render
professional services for others, including the itemized
services.
The purpose of these exclusions is to prevent the insurer from
covering losses that should be insured under a professional liability
policy. Note that this exclusion applies to “injury” or “damage,” rather
than “bodily injury” or “property damage.” Injury and damage can
have wide application, since they are broader in scope than bodily
injury or property damage. The purpose for using the words injury or
damage is not clear, given the fact that Coverage A only insures
bodily injury and property damage liability in the first place.
Not to confuse the situation, but let’s assume a CGL policy is
issued to an architect, engineer or surveyor and no professional
services exclusion applies. This means that the CGL policy covers
professional services but only to the extent of bodily injury, property
damage and personal and advertising injury. If the architect, engineer
or surveyor were to agree to hold harmless, defend and indemnify a
project owner for injury or damage arising solely out of the
professional’s work, coverage should apply because the professional
here has not assumed the tort liability of anyone and this exclusion
applies only to item f. dealing with tort liability assumed. In other
words, when the named insured under a CGL policy is an architect,
engineer or surveyor who agrees to hold harmless, defend and
indemnify another party to the agreement, because of the
professional’s sole fault, the professional’s CGL coverage remains
intact. This is so because (1) the agreement is not an “insured
contract, and (2) the liability of the professional for its own negligence
would exist even in the absence of any contract or agreement. This
assumes there is no professional liability exclusion.What may beg the question here is what coverage applies for
liability in the absence of any contract or agreement. The answer is
that it does not really matter under a CGL policy. For purposes of
categorizing the coverage and claims for underwriting or claims
statistical purposes, the appropriate coverage is premises-
operations.
One of the perennial problems with the similar exclusions under
the broad form liability endorsement, a problem that will probably
continue under the current forms, is the gray area between
professional and nonprofessional services. In one case, for example,
an engineering firm sought coverage under its general liability policy
for property damage liability resulting from the digging of a trench for
the laying of pipes. The insurer denied coverage by maintaining that
such activity was in the performance of “engineering services” and
“the preparation or approval of maps, plans, … surveys, designs or
specifications.” The Texas Court of Appeals, however, ruled for the
insured. It did so for two reasons. In the court’s opinion, the locating
of underground pipes was not an activity included within the term
“engineering services,” and the latter term was ambiguous in that it
was not defined. The case is Aetna Fire Underwriters Ins. Co. v.
Southwestern Engineering Co., 626 S.W.2d 99 (Tex. App. 1981).
However, in another case the professional services exclusion in a
CGL form was held to preclude coverage; this case is Natural Gas
Pipeline Co. of America v. Odom Offshore Surveys, Inc., 889 F.2d
633 (5th Cir. 1989). The U.S. Court of Appeals in the 5th Circuit held
that the professional liability exclusion barred coverage for damage to
a natural gas pipeline caused by the negligence of the insured’s
employees in misdirecting the placement of a boat’s anchor.
One of the ways commonly advocated to avoid such problems is
to purchase both professional liability and general liability insurance
from the same insurer. In reality, however, it is often impossible toobtain general liability insurance from the same insurer that provides
the professional liability policy.
Defense Costs Assumed under Contract
One of the amendments proposed by ISO in 1992 was the
following language, added to the contractual liability exclusion:
Solely for the purposes of liability assumed in an “insured
contract”, reasonable attorney fees and necessary litigation
expenses incurred by or for a party other than an insured are
deemed to be damages because of “bodily injury” or “property
damage” provided:
(a)    Liability to such party for, or for the cost of, that party’s
defense has also been assumed in the same “insured
contract”; and
(b)    Such attorney fees and litigation expenses are for defense
of that party against a civil or alternative dispute resolution
proceeding in which damages to which this insurance
applies are alleged.
Because this provision covers defense costs assumed under an
insured contract, it was represented by ISO as being a broadening of
contractual liability coverage since many insurers previously
considered the CGL policy to cover only damages (and not defense
costs) assumed under an insured contract. However, some insurers
apparently interpreted the policy to cover defense costs before the
new language was introduced—and, moreover, to cover an
indemnitee’s defense costs in addition to the limits of insurance.
Because the new language considers defense costs assumed under
contract to be damages, they are payable within the limits. In this
respect, some viewed the new language to be a restriction of existing
coverage.Because of its controversial nature, only a handful of states
approved this 1992 change. When the same change was
reintroduced as part of the 1996 revisions, it was approved by many
states. However, the 1996 and later editions of the CGL policy
contain additional provisions described earlier in this chapter under
the heading “Supplementary Payments.” The additional provisions
provide that when the indemnitee and the insured are codefendants
(and if several other conditions exist), the insurer will pay the defense
costs of both parties in addition to policy limits.
It is important to note that the defense costs provision in the
contractual liability exclusion applies only to indemnitees who are not
also additional insureds. Thus, one way for indemnitees of the insured
to sidestep this provision is to request and obtain additional insured
status. They will then be entitled to defense coverage in addition to
the limits of insurance regardless of whether they are codefendants
with the named insured.
Exclusion C—Liquor Liability
Exclusion c. of the CGL coverage forms excludes:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” for which any insured may
be held liable by reason of:
(1)    Causing or contributing to the intoxication of any person;
(2)    The furnishing of alcoholic beverages to a person under
the legal drinking age or under the influence of alcohol; or
(3)    Any statute, ordinance or regulation relating to the sale,
gift, distribution or use of alcoholic beverages.
This exclusion applies only if you are in the business of
manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving or furnishing alcoholicbeverages.
This exclusion has primarily the same intent as the one that
applies under the 1973 liability policy: to exclude liquor liability under
common law, as well as under statute, be it a dram shop act or an
alcoholic beverage control act. Apart from that similarity, there are
some notable differences.
Conspicuous by its absence from the 1986 and later editions of
the CGL form is the prior exclusion of coverage for owners or lessors
of premises used by others for purposes of liquor businesses. The
fact that owners or lessors of premises are now covered, when they
are not engaged in the liquor business, eliminates the problem of
requiring liquor liability insurance of tenants and naming premises
owners as additional insureds.
Also absent from the current CGL coverage forms is a separate
host liquor liability coverage, which in the broad form general liability
endorsement is intended to be nothing more than a clarification of
what the liquor liability exclusion does not encompass. It seems likely
that a separate host liquor liability provision was not included in the
current forms because it is too often confused as some kind of extra
protection, particularly since it is provided under the broad form
endorsement, which requires an additional premium. In fact, there
have been some cases in which liquor vendors who were without
separate liquor liability coverage attempted to find coverage under
the host liquor provision. In one case, for example, a vendor
maintained that because his license restricted liquor sales to 49
percent of the restaurant’s total revenue, his liquor operation was only
incidental to the insured’s business. The insured lost his argument.
The case is Heritage Ins. Co. of America v. Cilano, 433 So. 2d 1334
(Fla. App. 1983). The applicability of the liquor liability exclusion
hinges on the meaning of the phrase “in the business of.” Since that
phrase is not defined, it could present a problem for insurers and
insureds alike. In one case, the New Hampshire Supreme Court heldthat the word business means “any regular activity that occupies
one’s time and attention, with or without a direct profit motive.” In a
narrow sense, it means “an activity with a direct profit motive.” Since
the word business was considered to be ambiguous, a club was
granted coverage despite the liquor liability exclusion. The case is
Laconia Rod & Gun Club v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co.,
459 A.2d 249 (N.H. 1983).
Another common attack on the CGL policy’s liquor exclusion
relates to the endorsement, Products-Completed Operations
Redefined CG 24 07, which is required for a liquor establishment that
sells food and beverages for consumption on and away from the
business. Some liquor establishments have maintained that this
endorsement creates an ambiguity. The effect of this endorsement is
to redefine the policy’s definition of the “products-completed
operations hazard” to encompass not only bodily injury or property
damage that occurs away from the named insured’s premises, after
the product has been relinquished to others, but also injury or
damage that occurs on the named insured’s premises after the
product has been relinquished to others. In the case of B.L.G.
Enterprises, Inc. d/b/a The Alley Bar v. First Financial Ins. Co., 491
S.E. 2d 695 (S.C. App. 1977), the court stated that this endorsement
left undisturbed the policy’s exclusion of coverage for an intoxicated
patron who left the premises and caused injury to himself and to
others.
Despite the foregoing cases, owners or operators of liquor
establishments would be well advised to obtain liquor liability
insurance. Whether organizations that hold special events where
liquor is sold need special insurance is a question that is difficult to
answer. If they require a permit, there is a good chance they should
have liquor liability insurance.
In any event, the inference may now be made that if a person or
organization is not in the business (whatever that means) ofmanufacturing, distributing, selling, or furnishing alcoholic beverages,
it will have protection by exception to this exclusion. The coverage
that is intended to be provided should correspond to those events
commonly cited as being covered by host liquor liability insurance.
In 1988, Insurance Services Office proposed changes to the CGL
coverage forms that would have modified the liquor liability exclusion
substantially. While ISO defended the modification as a means of
distinguishing between a social host and a purveyor of alcoholic
beverages, the Risk and Insurance Management Society (RIMS) and
other parties opposed the change. Following public hearings by the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) and
meetings between ISO and NAIC, ISO agreed to leave the existing
1986 liquor liability exclusion intact and, as part of 1990 CGL
amendments, offer the revised exclusion as an optional endorsement
entitled Amendment of Liquor Liability Exclusion, CG 21 50.
The amended exclusion contains parts (1), (2), and (3) of the
regular liquor liability exclusion quoted above, plus the following:
This exclusion applies only if you:
(1)    Manufacture, sell or distribute alcoholic beverages;
(2)    Serve or furnish alcoholic beverages for a charge whether
or not such activity:
(a)    Requires a license;
(b)    Is for the purpose of financial gain or livelihood; or
(3)    Serve or furnish alcoholic beverages without a charge, if a
license is required for such activity.The amended exclusion avoids the troublesome question of
whether an insured is in the business of selling alcoholic beverages.
For example, the exclusion applies in any situation, even a social
gathering, when the insured serves alcoholic beverages for a charge.
If the insured is required to have a license to serve alcoholic
beverages, the exclusion applies even if the beverages are served
free of charge.
In the 1990 CGL amendments, ISO also introduced a new
endorsement that contains the exclusion just described but allows
coverage for activities specifically described in the endorsement. An
advantage of this endorsement over the regular liquor liability
exclusion in the CGL form is that the endorsement allows the insured
to be certain of coverage for the described event instead of having to
depend on the insurer’s interpretation of whether the insured is in the
business of serving alcoholic beverages. The endorsement,
Amendment of Liquor Liability Exclusion—Exception for Scheduled
Activities (CG 21 51), allows the underwriter to assess the risk
connected with the event to be covered and charge an additional
premium for the specified event.
Note that in light of some court decisions holding for coverage
involving liquor-related accidents, ISO is revising this exclusion in the
April 2013 edition of the CGL form to preclude coverage even if the
claims against any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing.
The cases cited by ISO that have been the impetus for this change
are as follows.
In Penn-America Insurance Co. v. Peccadillos, 27 A.3d 259 (Pa.
Super. Ct. 2011), the court ruled that the insurer had a duty to defend
its named insured under a CGL policy when the named insured was
alleged to have continued to serve alcohol to visibly intoxicated
patrons and then ejected them from the premises in an inebriated
condition that resulted in an auto accident with deaths and injuries.In McGuire v. Curry, 766 N.W.2d 501 (SD, 2009), the court ruled
that the employer could be held liable for the actions of its underage
employee when the employer allowed its underage employee
unsupervised and unrestricted access to alcoholic beverages.
Briefly, the insurer, in the case of Essex Insurance Co. v. Café
Dupont, LLC, 674 F. Supp. 2d 166 (USDC, DC, 2009), issued a CGL
policy to a nightclub operator who was sued because of a liquor-
related incident. After being served and permitted to consume
alcoholic beverages, the customer drove off in his auto, despite being
intoxicated or at least appearing to be intoxicated, and was involved
in an accident, seriously injuring another motorist. The suit filed by the
legal guardian of the injured motorist against the nightclub operator
sought $15 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in punitive
damages. The nightclub operator also purchased a liquor liability
policy but it was not in force at the time of this incident.
The insurer that issued the CGL policy to the nightclub operator
denied coverage and defense and later filed a declaratory judgment
action. One of the CGL policy’s exclusions that was the “Achilles
heel” of the nightclub operator precluded coverage for “any act or
omission by the insured or any employee of any insured that respects
providing or failing to provide transportation, detaining or failing to
detain any person, or any act of assuming or not assuming
responsibility for the wellbeing, supervision or care of any person
allegedly under or suspected to be under the influence of alcohol.”
The nightclub operator argued that the foregoing exclusion only
applied to injuries to the person under or suspected to be under the
influence of alcohol. The court disagreed and said that was an
unreasonable interpretation. The court went on to explain that
“[a]lthough the exclusion only covers failure to provide transportation
… detain anyone … or …assum[e] responsibility for the wellbeing of
an intoxicated person, it applies to any injury, loss or damage that
might arise as a result.” The court also stated it would not seek out
ambiguity where none exists.As the result of these cases, ISO is adding to its liquor liability
exclusion verbiage which will in effect (as noted previously) preclude
coverage even if claims allege negligence or other wrongdoing in:
•    the supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of
others; or
•    providing or failing to provide transportation with respect to
any person that may be under the influence of alcohol.
Note that ISO does have liquor liability coverage forms, CG 00 33
(occurrence) and CG 00 34 (claims-made). These forms provide
liquor liability coverage to the extent an underwriter is willing to
provide it. A great deal of this type coverage is written in the excess
and surplus lines market.
Bring Your Own Bottle (BYOB) Exposures
Some restaurants, instead of selling and serving alcoholic
beverages, allow patrons to bring their own bottles. Restaurants in
this category that permit bringing in bottles of alcoholic beverages
sometimes will charge a corkage fee, require that the beverages be
poured and served by restaurant employees, and may charge for the
mixers and ice. From time to time, producers have questioned
underwriters about whether these practices of restaurants are
subject to the liquor liability exclusion. This question is being
answered with the response of another revision to the liquor liability
exclusion which ISO states is a broadening of coverage.
The revision states: for purposes of this exclusion, permitting a
person to bring alcoholic beverages on your premises, for
consumption on your premises, whether or not a fee is charged or a
license is required for such activity, is not by itself considered the
business of selling, serving or furnishing alcoholic beverages.It must be remember that even if the BYOB exposure is an
expressed exception to the liquor liability exclusion, a liquor-related
accident can still preclude coverage as illustrated in the case of
Simmon v. Homatas, 925 N.E.2d 1089 (IL, 2010). In addition, as
mentioned later with reference to the multi-state endorsements, when
any one of the Amendment Of Liquor Liability Exclusion
Endorsements is issued (namely, CG 21 50, CG 21 51, CG 29 52
and CG 29 53), the exclusion will also apply even if an insured
permits any person to bring any alcoholic beverages on the named
insured’s premises for consumption on the premises.
These revisions dealing with the liquor liability exclusion affect both
the CGL occurrence form (CG 00 01) and claims-made form (CG 00
02), as well as the Products/Completed Operations Liability
occurrence form (CG 00 37) and claims-made form (CG 00 38).
Exclusion D—Workers Compensation and Similar Laws
The workers compensation exclusion deals with a number of
employment-related statutory coverages. The exclusion applies to:
Any obligation of the insured under a workers’
compensation, disability benefits or unemployment
compensation law or any similar law.
Use of the word “obligation” in the above exclusion means that no
coverage applies when (1) an insured has such statutory coverage
and it applies to a loss or (2) an insured should have obtained the
statutory protection that applies to a loss. Note also that this
exclusion applies to the insured (which includes the named insured),
rather than the named insured only. While a disability benefits law
applies to nonemployment disability, it is still considered to be an
employment-related law, because only those who are employed cangenerally qualify for the coverage in those states that mandate it. The
same criterion applies to unemployment insurance.
Exclusion E—Employers Liability
Employers liability insurance is a necessary complement to
workers compensation coverage and both are generally available
under one statutory form of protection, except in monopolistic-fund
states.
Before the exclusion itself is discussed, it may be worthwhile to
review the reasons why employers liability insurance is still
considered necessary. They are as follows:
•    Workers compensation insurance may be elective, rather than
compulsory, for certain types of employment. Employers
liability insurance gives the employer both defense cost and
indemnification coverage against liability for injury to exempt
employees.
•    Employers who are sued by members of an employee’s family
for loss of consortium (i.e., loss of companionship, comfort,
and affection) may be required to pay damages even though
the disabled employee has collected benefits under workers
compensation coverage.
•    Employers can become involved in suits called third-party-over
or simply third-party actions. These actions arise when an
injured employee sues a negligent third party (regardless of
workers compensation benefits received), and the third party,
in turn, impleads the employer. The employer, in such a case,
must look to employers liability insurance (or stopgap
coverage in monopolistic-fund states), unless the employer
assumed the liability of the third party. In that instance, theCGL contractual liability coverage, rather than employers
liability coverage, is the applicable coverage.
The employers liability exclusion of the current CGL forms reads as
follows:
“Bodily injury” to:
(1)    An “employee” of the insured arising out of and in the
course of:
(a)    Employment by the insured; or
(b)    Performing duties related to the conduct of the
insured’s business; or
(2)    The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of that
“employee” as a consequence of Paragraph (1) above.
This exclusion applies:
(1)    Whether the insured may be liable as an employer or in
any other capacity; and
(2)    To any obligation to share damages with or repay
someone else who must pay damages because of the
injury.
This exclusion does not apply to liability assumed by the insured
under an “insured contract”.
Part (1)(a) of this exclusion is intended to prevent an insurer from
having to cover the liability of any insured because of injury sustained
by its employee that would or should be covered by employers
liability insurance. This exclusion is not limited to employees of thenamed insured; it applies to employees of any party that qualifies as
an insured under the policy, including an additional insured.
With the 1993 revision of the CGL policy, the terms “employee”
and “leased worker” were defined in order to provide coverage for
employee leasing arrangements (see Chapter 5). Because the term
“employee” is defined to include a “leased worker,” the 1993 and
later editions of the CGL policy exclude bodily injury sustained by a
leased worker defined in part as a person leased to the insured for
purposes of performing duties related to the conduct of the insured’s
business. This is the rationale for part (1)(b) of the above exclusion.
However, not within the scope of this exclusion are “temporary
workers,” whose employment is on a day-to-day or short-term basis,
and “volunteer workers,” a newly defined term of the 2001 edition
meaning in part a person who is not an employee of the named
insured.
When the definition of “temporary worker” was introduced by ISO
in 1993, few believed that the newly introduced term would lead to
litigation. The linchpin or problem with that definition is that part of the
definition reading “Temporary worker means a worker who is
furnished to an entity ….” Some courts have held that “furnished to” is
ambiguous, but not all courts agree. In light of many disputes over
that term and the lack of consensus, primarily falling on ambiguity, it
would not be surprising if ISO were to revisit that definition in the
future. The second part of the exclusion eliminates coverage for
claims or suits by spouses or other close relatives against employers
as a consequence of bodily injury sustained by employees. The
apparent rationale for this part of the exclusion is to clarify that such
claims or suits must be filed under the employers liability portion of
the workers compensation policy. Although earlier editions of
employers liability insurance did not state that coverage applied to
these consequential damages, the current workers compensation and
employers liability policy does.Dual Capacity Claims
The employers liability exclusion is stated to apply whether the
insured is liable as an employer or in any other capacity. The phrase
“in any other capacity” is intended to encompass claims or suits
against employers under the so-called dual capacity doctrine.
The dual capacity doctrine holds that an employer normally
shielded by the exclusive remedy of workers compensation laws may
still be answerable for additional damages in tort. This type of claim
can occur when the employer is judged to occupy a second capacity
that constitutes an exposure that is common to the public in general,
rather than to one’s employment. A simplified example of an event to
which this doctrine might apply is the injury that occurs to an
employee of an insured beer distributor while the employee is
stocking the insured’s product on a vendor’s shelves.
If the dual capacity doctrine applied in the above example, the
employee would have two sources of recovery from the employer.
The first would be under the employer’s workers compensation
insurance, since the injury arose out of and during the course of
employment. The second source of recovery would be a lawsuit
against the employer, such as any other member of the public could
file against the employer. In other words, the injury, or the exposure
thereto, is not necessarily peculiar to employment. It is an exposure
to which the employee would have been equally exposed, apart from
his or her employment, as a consumer of the product.
Since the workers compensation and employers liability policy is
now recognized as the only source of coverage for such suits by
employees against employers, whether under the dual capacity
doctrine or otherwise, the intent of the employers liability exclusion of
the CGL coverage forms should be clear.Third-Party-Over Actions
The last part of the employers liability exclusion deals with third-
party-over actions. The reason third-party-over actions are excluded
under the current forms is that coverage for such actions is available
under employers liability insurance, with one exception. This exception
is when such liability is assumed by the insured under a contract. In
that event, coverage applies under the CGL coverage form subject of
course to the scope of that coverage for liability assumed under an
insured contract.
Assume, for example, that an insured agrees to hold harmless
and indemnify another party for liability stemming from the insured’s
negligence, including injury to employees of the insured. An employee
of the insured is injured during the course of employment and collects
benefits under the insured’s workers compensation insurance. The
employee then sues the third party for whom work was performed.
When the third party demands that the employer hold it harmless
against the employee’s suit, coverage should apply under the
insured’s contractual liability coverage of the insured’s CGL policy. In
the absence of a contractual assumption by the employer, coverage
for a third-party-over action would apply under the employers liability
portion of the workers compensation policy.
Exclusion F—Pollution
Without a doubt, the CGL provision that has changed the most, in
terms of number of times and in scope, is the pollution exclusion. It
was once referred to as the “absolute pollution exclusion” in 1986
when it was first introduced because it eliminated coverage in most
situations for bodily injury and property damage resulting from
pollutants, and it totally excluded the costs of cleaning up pollutants. It
was not too long thereafter that amendments were introduced to thisexclusion, first to strengthen and then to liberalize it in a number of
ways.
To gain a better perspective on how this exclusion has changed
and the significance of the changes, each of the changes is discussed
briefly later in these pages through numbered notes on an exhibit
entitled “A Chronology of Changes Affecting the Pollution Exclusion.”
It is first necessary to understand why the pollution exclusion was first
introduced with standard forms and why problems were encountered
with it.
Background
The first standard pollution exclusion was introduced in 1970.
Originally added to general liability policies by endorsement, the 1970
pollution exclusion was later incorporated into the standard 1973 CGL
coverage part. However, the first application for approval of a
pollution exclusion to the Maryland Insurance Department came in
October 1981. Approval was granted in January 1983.5
According to its drafters, the exclusion was introduced for two
reasons:
1.    To make clear that the policy’s definition of “occurrence”
was not to categorize all pollution or contamination damage
as being expected or intended by the insured.
2.    To clarify that bodily injury or property damage resulting
from pollution or contamination was excluded, even if
accidental, unless the discharge, dispersal, release or
escape was both sudden and accidental.6
However, when the definition of occurrence was taken into
consideration in liability actions stemming from gradual pollution, thecourts found that the exclusion either was “temporal” or
“nontemporal” in nature.
To be considered temporal, the word “sudden” would be required
to have one meaning and that is a temporal aspect of immediacy; that
is, the characteristic of being swift, abrupt, quick, instantaneous, etc.
The problem for some insurers has been that when dictionary
definitions of sudden are consulted, all are not limited to the temporal
aspect and, instead, also consider sudden to mean unanticipated and
unforeseen. As a result, the courts in some of these cases have
agreed that when the word sudden is defined in both a temporal and
nontemporal way, it is considered to be ambiguous and construed in
the insured’s favor.
Another aspect of this exclusion concerns the alleged polluter who
seeks payment for the costs of cleaning up the source of
contamination on the polluter’s own property. The question is: where
does the polluter’s own property end? Some say at the water table
or at the level where property is considered to be within the domain
of natural resources. In one of the leading cases on this subject,
coverage was held to apply, despite the exclusion of property
damage to property owned by the insured (exclusion j.1), for two
reasons:
1.    The cleanup costs were deemed to be necessary to
prevent further damage to third parties.
2.    If steps had not been taken to clean up the premises, the
insurer would have sustained additional losses.
The case is Bankers Trust Co. v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity
Co., 518 F. Supp. 371 (S.D.N.Y. 1981), decided by the United States
district court for the southern district of New York. For a time sincethis exclusion was introduced in 1986, it addressed this problem by
totally excluding the costs of cleaning up pollutants. However, since
1998, certain exceptions apply to the exclusion of cleanup costs.
The imposition of liability under a variety of federal and state laws
also is a target of the pollution exclusion, particularly enforcement
under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation
and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 1980, also known as Superfund; the
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, referred to
as SARA; and the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
of 1976. Alleged polluters, especially those who are or were involved
in the handling of wastes, are commonly looking to their CGL policies
for protection in the wake of suits filed against them by the federal
government. Because the 1970 pollution exclusion has not lived up to
insurers’ expectations, the action to implement a broader exclusion
and a buy-back procedure was viewed as the only way to keep
insurers from having to pick up all the costs prompted by the pollution
claims and suits.
The wording of exclusion f. in the CGL policy is found in the
accompanying exhibit along with information as to when the exclusion
was amended. An explanation of the rationale for the changes follows
the exhibit. The 1986 and subsequent versions of this exclusion can
be found in the appendices to this text.
A Chronology of Changes Affecting the Pollution
Exclusion (f.)
BI and PD
Exclusion
1986 1998(1)(1)  “Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out
of the actual, alleged or threatened discharge,
dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape
of “pollutants”:
At or from
the Premises(a)    At or from any premises, site or location
which is or was at any time owned by or1998 (2) occupied by, or rented or loaned to, any
insured. However, this subparagraph does
not apply to:
Heating
Equipment
Coverage
1997(i)      “Bodily injury” if sustained within a
building and caused by smoke, fumes,
vapor or soot produced by or
originating from equipment that is
used to heat, cool, or dehumidify the
building, or equipment that is used to
heat water for personal use, by the
building’s occupants or their guests;Cooling and
Dehumidifying
Equipment
Coverage
2004 (3)
Owner as
Additional
Insured 1998
(4)(ii)     “Bodily injury” or “property damage”
for which you may be held liable, if
you are a contractor and the owner or
lessee of such premises, site or
location has been added to your policy
as an additional insured with respect
to your ongoing operations performed
for that additional insured at that
premises, site or location and such
premises, site or location is not and
never was owned or occupied by, or
rented or loaned to, any insured, other
than that additional insured; or
Hostile Fire
Coverage
1986 (5)(iii)    “Bodily injury” or “property damage”
arising out of heat, smoke or fumes
from a “hostile fire”;
Waste
Treatment
Site 1986 (6)(b)    At or from any premises, site or location is
or was at any time used by or for anyinsured or others for the handling, storage,
disposal, processing or treatment of waste;
Transported,
Handled
Processed,
etc. 1986 (7)(c)    Which are or were at any time transported,
handled, stored, treated, disposed of, or
processed as waste by or for: (1) Any
insured; or (2) Any person or organization
for whom you may be legally responsible;
or
At the Job
Site While
Work Is in
Progress
1998 (8)(d)    At or from any premises, site or location on
which any insured or any contractors or
subcontractors working directly or indirectly
on any insured’s behalf are performing
operations if the “pollutants” are brought on
or to the premises, site or location in
connection with such operations by such
insured, contractor or subcontractor.
However, this subparagraph does not apply
to
Mobile
Equipment
Exception
1996 (9)(i)      “Bodily injury” or “property damage”
arising out of the escape or fuels,
lubricants or other operating fluids
which are needed to perform the
normal electrical, hydraulic or
mechanical functions necessary for
the operation of “mobile equipment” or
its parts, if such fuels, lubricants or
other operating fluids escape from a
vehicle part designed to hold or
receive them. This exception does not
apply if the “bodily injury” or “property
damage” arises out of the intentional
discharge, dispersal or release of the
fuels, lubricants or other operatingfluids, or if such fuels, lubricants or
other operating fluids are brought on
or to the premises, site or location
with the intent to be discharged,
dispersed or released as part of the
operations being performed by such
insured, contractor or subcontractor;
Contractors’
Operations
Vapor
Coverage
1998 (10)(ii)     “Bodily injury” or “property damage”
sustained within a building and caused
by the release of gases, fumes or
vapors from materials brought into
that building in connection with
operations being performed by you or
on your behalf by a contractor or
subcontractor; or
Hostile Fire
Coverage
1986 (11)(iii)    “Bodily injury” or “property damage”
arising out of heat, smoke or fumes
from a “hostile fire”
Professional
Cleanup
Exclusion
1986 (12)(e)    At or from any premises, site or location on
which an insured or any contractors or
subcontractors working directly or indirectly
on any insured’s behalf are performing
operations if the operations are to test for,
monitor, cleanup, remove, contain, treat,
detoxify or neutralize, or in any way
respond to, or assess the effects of,
“pollutants.”
 (2)    Any loss, cost or expense arising out of any:
Cleanup
Exclusion
1998 (13)(a)    Request, demand, order or statutory or
regulatory requirement that any insured or
others test for, monitor, cleanup, remove,
contain, treat, detoxify or neutralize, or inany way respond to, or assess the effects
of “pollutants”; or
Cleanup
Exclusion
1986 (14)(b)    Claim or suit by or on behalf of a
governmental authority for damages
because of testing for, monitoring, cleaning
up, removing, containing, treating,
detoxifying, or neutralizing or in any way
responding to or assessing the effects of
“pollutants.”
Cleanup
Exclusion
Exceptions
1998 (15)However, this subparagraph does not apply to liability
for damages because of “property damage” that the
insured would have in the absence of such request,
demand, order or statutory or regulatory requirement
or such claim or “suit” by or on behalf of a
governmental authority.
The pollution exclusion as introduced with the 1986 CGL policy
provisions has been restructured extensively and expanded to the
point where it would be difficult to determine what has changed
without the above chronology and a brief explanation of amendments
below.
(1)    This first subparagraph is one of the few remaining
originals. However, even this part was amended in 1998
with the reference to the term “pollutants” in quotes to
show that its meaning is to be found in the definitions
section of the CGL forms rather than at the end of the
exclusion, as has been the case since 1986.
(2)    With the exception of the second sentence, this, too, is
one of the few remaining original provisions. The second
sentence was added in 1998, as part of the reconstructionprocess. Prior to this change, amendments to the
exclusion were simply added in an unorganized fashion
making it difficult to determine when a particular provision
applied. This second sentence is a prelude to three
exceptions specifically applicable to subparagraph f.(1)(a).
(3)    This is the first exception to subparagraph f.(1)(a) and
applies to bodily injury if sustained within a building and
caused by smoke, fumes, vapor, or soot from equipment
used to heat that building. This exception is meant to
clarify the point that the CGL forms apply to a claim for
bodily injury suffered by someone who has been adversely
affected by smoke or fumes from a heater. For example, if
a customer of the insured is injured or dies from carbon
monoxide seeping from the insured’s furnace, the CGL
form will respond to a subsequent claim. Note that the
furnace (or any other equipment to heat the building) need
not be owned by the insured. One question was whether
this exception was broad enough to encompass bodily
injury by persons who acquire the so-called Legionnaires
Disease. To the extent that this disease is caused by vapor
from air-conditioning systems, there was room for
argument, given that heating systems also commonly
include air-conditioning.
To avoid these types of arguments and, according to ISO,
at the request of agents and insurers, this building heating
exception was clarified with the 2004 CGL revisions to
include cooling and dehumidifying equipment, since both
are said to have similar exposures to building heating
equipment insofar as emitting various toxins. What may not
have been anticipated with this latest change is that with
humidity comes the possibility for the growth of mold, which
would then likely be covered in light of this revision.(4)    The second exception was introduced in 1998 as a
broadening of coverage and applies when the named
insured is a contractor. Prior to this change, the pollution
exclusion was triggered if pollutants escaped or were
released from a premises or site owned or occupied by
any insured. Assume, for purposes of illustration, that the
named insured contractor is working on a building site and
the owner of the site requires that it be listed as an
additional insured on the contractor’s CGL policy. While
work is being performed, pollutants leak from the site and
damage an adjoining premises. The owner of the adjoining
premises files suit against the contractor and the site
owner, who in turn looks to the contractor for protection as
an additional insured. Prior to this change in 1998, the
exclusion could have been interpreted to exclude a claim
from the adjoining property owner because the additional
insured owned the site and the pollution came from there.
The situation is now changed. The fact that the additional
insured owns the site from which escaping pollutants have
harmed a third party will not prevent the named insured
contractor from receiving coverage under his or her CGL
policy, if the named insured is held to be liable for the
damage. The relationship of the additional insured, as
owner or lessee of the work site and as an additional
insured on the contractor’s CGL form, no longer has an
effect on the question of coverage for the named insured
contractor. Note, however, that this exception applies only
to additional insured status during ongoing operations, not
within the “products-completed operations hazard.”
(5)    The third exception is for bodily injury or property damage
arising out of heat, smoke or fumes from a hostile fire.
This is not new to CGL forms, but the exception has been
moved so that its relationship with subparagraph f.(1)(a) ismade clearer. It also applies by exception to d.(iii).
Basically, the exception means, for example, that if
someone were to be injured from smoke from a fire
billowing from the named insured’s warehouse containing
herbicides, pesticides, and other contaminants, the CGL
form would apply to a bodily injury claim made against the
insured, notwithstanding the pollution exclusion.
(6), (7) These two subparagraphs remain unchanged since they
were introduced in 1986. They flatly exclude any bodily
injury or property damage emanating from waste
treatment sites, as well as while being transported,
handled, treated, stored, disposed of, or processed as
waste by the insured or by anyone for whom the named
insured may be legally responsible.
(8)    This subparagraph 1.(d) is sometimes overlooked. It is an
original provision but was amended in 1998 with the
addition of the last sentence. This is a significant
subparagraph because some coverage applies by
exception for bodily injury or property damage arising out
of the named insured’s products and completed
operations. This exclusion does not contain any statement
that products and completed operations are excepted from
the exclusion. However, under certain circumstances,
coverage can be inferred from the language of the
exclusion. Thus, if the exclusion does not encompass
bodily injury or property damage under a particular set of
circumstances, then the bodily injury or property damage is
covered, subject of course to all other policy provisions.
To illustrate, say the named insured sells and installs
carpeting. If, after being installed by the named insured in a
customer’s home, a particular lot of carpeting emits vapors
that cause bodily injury to the home owner, the injury claimwould not be excluded by any provision of the pollution
exclusion. The vapors, although they are pollutants, were
not discharged at the named insured’s premises or at a
waste handling site [subparagraphs (1)(a) and (b)]; they
were not transported or handled as waste [subparagraph
(1)(c)]; and they were not discharged at a site at which the
insured or any contractors are performing operations
[subparagraph (1)(d)]. Subparagraph (1)(d), because it
uses only present tense verbs (“premises … on which any
insured or any contractors or subcontractors working
directly or indirectly on any insured’s behalf are performing
operations”), seems capable of excluding bodily injury or
property damage that occurs only while operations are
being performed and should therefore not be applicable to
bodily injury or property damage that occurs after work is
completed.
In fact, as noted in (10) below, at least two court cases
have upheld coverage for injuries arising from the emission
of toxic fumes from carpeting, undoubtedly leading to the
introduction of a provision permitting coverage in these
instances.
However, coverage for products and completed operations
does not apply in all instances. For example, completed
operations in the nature of waste disposal are clearly
excluded by subparagraph (1)(b).
In addition to products and completed operations, another
area where some coverage can be inferred from the
exclusionary wording of 1(d) is where its subparts (d)(i)
and (d)(ii) do not apply. Thus, if a pollution loss results
under conditions not described in (d)(i) or (d)(ii) and the
location is not otherwise excluded by sections (a), (b), or
(c) of the pollution exclusion, then the loss may be covered—including cleanup costs as addressed in part (2) of the
exclusion.
To illustrate, assume that the insured is an independent
contractor working on a building project away from its own
premises. If the insured negligently causes the release of
pollutants that were brought to the work site by the owner
or by another contractor who is not working on behalf of
the insured, resulting damages for bodily injury or property
damage (and cleanup costs) should be covered by the
contractor’s CGL form. The exclusion would apply,
however, if the pollutants had been brought to the work site
by the insured or by a contractor or subcontractor working
on behalf of the insured, or if the insured’s operation from
which the pollution resulted had been for purposes of
testing for, monitoring, cleaning up, etc., of pollutants.
(9)    Subparagraph (d)(i) was introduced in 1996 to make clear
that the pollution exclusion does not apply to bodily injury
or property damage arising out of the escape of fuels,
lubricants or other operating fluids which are needed to
perform the normal electrical, hydraulic or mechanical
functions necessary for the operation of mobile equipment
or its parts, if such fuels, etc., escape from a vehicle part
designed to hold, store or receive them. This exception
does not apply if the fuels, lubricants or other operating
fluids are intentionally discharged, dispersed or released,
or if such fuels, lubricants or other operating fluids are
brought on or to the premises, site, or location with the
intent to be discharged, dispersed or released as part of
the operations being performed by such insured,
contractor, or subcontractor.
(10)  Subparagraph (d)(ii) was added as an exception to the
pollution exclusion in 1998. This makes clear what mighthave been subjected to argument under subparagraph (1)
(d). A probable rationale for this addition is that actual
cases on point were being ruled against insurers. In
Garfield Slope Housing Corp. v. Public Service Mutual
Insurance Co., 973 F. Supp. 326 (E.D. N.Y. 1997), a
former owner of an apartment sued the building apartment
manager, alleging she was injured by fumes from new
hallway carpet that had been installed and removed while
she still lived in the apartment. The court held for coverage
despite a pollution exclusion, because the policy could
reasonably be construed as applying to environmental
pollution and not applying to claims based on carpet
fumes. Moreover, the court said, “the kind of injuries to
which a reasonable insured might expect smelly carpet to
give rise—that is, aggravation, inconvenience, annoyance,
etc.—are plainly not those that would typically implicate a
liability policy.”
In the later case of Freidline v. Shelby Insurance
Company, 739 N.E.2d 178 (Ind. App. 2000), occupants of
an office building filed suit against an insured carpet
installer alleging they were harmed by toxic fumes from
substances used to install carpeting. The court held that
the pollution exclusion was ambiguous because while the
policy’s definition of pollutants included the word “fumes,” it
did not include carpet glue or any other substance used to
install carpet. The insurer would prefer that the emphasis
of this claim be on fumes, the court explained, but the
plaintiffs did not complain of injury because of fumes but
rather by fumes coming from substances used to install
carpeting.
(11)  See note (5) for an explanation of this subparagraph.(12)  Subparagraph 1 (e) is also one of the original provisions
introduced with the 1986 exclusion. Specifically precluded
from coverage is any bodily injury or property damage
emanating from operations in any way related to the
testing, monitoring, cleanup, removal, containment,
treatment, detoxifying, neutralizing, or in any way
assessing the effects of pollutants. So, for example, if a
contractor were hired to perform a Phase II environmental
task, no coverage would apply for bodily injury or property
damage emanating from that work.
(13), (14) and (15) Before the 1998 revisions, commercial
general liability insurance utilizing standard ISO wording
did not apply to any loss, cost or expense arising out of
any request, demand or order that any insured test for,
monitor, cleanup, treat, or in any way respond to or
assess the effects of pollutants. The revised CGL forms
add that the insurance also does not apply to a “statutory
or regulatory requirement” that any insured cleanup or in
any way respond to the effects of pollutants.
The words “request,” “demand,” and “order” signify an
action on the part of some entity that forces the insured to
cleanup a pollution spill. However, there may be some
statute or regulation on the books that would require the
insured to cleanup a pollution spill, but, for whatever
reason, no entity has taken the initiative to demand action
on the part of the insured. The insured could clean up the
spill and then present the bill to the insurer and say, “there
was no actual demand or order for us to clean up the spill,
but there is a regulation that holds us responsible and
requires us to clean up our mess, so we did, and there is
no applicable wording in the pollution exclusion that covers
this situation. Please pay the bill.” With the revised wording
of this cleanup exclusion, the insurer is now saying that theCGL forms will not cover the cleanup expenses of the
insured, even if the insured was acceding to some
regulatory wording instead of responding to a demand or
order. In effect, the exclusion’s wording expands
application of the exclusion such that it no longer requires a
request, demand or order that the insured cleanup in order
to trigger the exclusion’s application. Under the revised
wording, so long as a statute, ordinance, or regulation
dictating a cleanup obligation of any kind exists (however
obscure), that statute, once located will be the basis of
excluding coverage here.
This part of the pollution exclusion has another change
worth noting. There has been some confusion when it came
to the relationship between cleanup costs and property
damage. On the one hand, the insured may be liable for
property damage due to a release or escape of pollutants
and, through an exception of the pollution exclusion, have
insurance coverage for that property damage. On the other
hand, some insurers argued that the insured has no
coverage for cleanup costs. And, the cleanup costs
exclusion was being interpreted by some to dispute or void
any property damage coverage, a finding not supported by
clear policy wording. So, where does paying for property
damage end and cleanup costs for polluted property
begin?
The 1998 revision clarifies this issue by declaring that the
cleanup costs section of the pollution exclusion does not
apply to liability for property damage that the insured would
have anyway. In other words, if the insured is liable for
property damage due to a pollution spill, and has insurance
coverage due to an exception to the pollution exclusion, the
CGL form should pay for the property damage, and thereshould be no denial of coverage with an assertion that the
property damage is a cleanup cost and thus not covered.
Note that the revisions, as propounded by ISO and discussed
above, are stated to apply only to coverage for bodily injury and
property damage liability; there is no reference to personal and
advertising injury liability. However, personal and advertising injury
coverage does have a pollution exclusion, as discussed in a later
chapter. Interestingly too, despite the many cases involving noise
pollution, as well as injury through electromagnetic exposure, the
pollution exclusion does not address these types of risk.
Pollution Coverage Options
ISO has prepared a number of endorsements for modifying
exclusion f. to provide various levels of pollution liability coverage, or
to exclude the pollution liability exposure entirely. The bad news is
that there are not many insurers that are willing to provide coverage
enhancements despite the availability of the endorsements.
Generally, insureds in need of broader coverage need to seek out
specialty line insurers for buy-back environmental impairment
insurance.
However, the following paragraphs describe briefly the purpose
for each of the ISO standard endorsements:
(1)    Pollution Liability Extension Endorsement (CG 04 22).
When this endorsement is attached, subparagraph (1) of
exclusion f., dealing with bodily injury and property damage
is deleted.
(2)    Limited Pollution Liability Extension Endorsement (CG
24 15). This endorsement expands coverage in two ways.
First, the pollution exclusion is modified so as to not applyto bodily injury or property damage from premises owned,
occupied, rented or loaned to the named insured. The
second way the exclusion is modified is to provide
coverage at locations at which the insured is performing
operations that could be described as nonenvironmental in
nature. Coverage also applies to cleanup costs other than
as mandated by law. As this endorsement states, the
exclusion for cleanup costs does not apply to liability for
sums the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as
damages because of property damage that the insured
would have in the absence of such request, demand,
order, or statutory or regulatory requirement, or by such
claim or suit by or on behalf of a governmental authority.
(3)    Pollution Liability Coverage Part (CG 00 39). This
coverage form is for designated sites. Written on a claims-
made basis, it provides coverage for bodily injury and
property damage resulting from covered “pollution
incidents,” as defined in this coverage part, including
cleanup costs as may be required by law. To obtain
coverage in the event of voluntary cleanup costs, it would
be necessary to attach the Voluntary Cleanup Costs
Reimbursement (CG 28 33), which is only available with
this coverage Part.
(4)    Pollution Liability Coverage Part [Limited] (CG 00 40).
This coverage form has the same coverage characteristics
as the preceding coverage part, except that it does not
provide coverage for cleanup costs as may be required by
law.
(5)    Underground Storage Tank Policy, Designated Tanks
(CG 00 42). This policy provides two coverages: The first
liability coverage applies in the event of bodily injury or
property damage sustained by third parties and caused byan underground storage tank incident. The second
coverage applies for corrective action costs the insured is
obligated to pay in response to EPA requirements,
because of an underground storage tank incident.
(6)    Total Pollution Exclusion (CG 21 49). This endorsement
is stated to apply to bodily injury and property damage
which would not have occurred in whole or in part but for
the actual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal,
seepage, migration, release or escape of “pollutants” any
time. Also precluded are cleanup costs whether done
voluntarily or through governmental order.
(7)    Total Pollution Exclusion with a Hostile Fire Exception
(CG 21 55). Despite an absolute pollution exclusion, it is
advisable to obtain the hostile fire exception, which
insurers are not reluctant to provide. In fact, it would be
advisable to also obtain the building heating equipment
exception. If that is possible, then the endorsement listed
below, (CG 21 65), would be applicable. Otherwise, this
one (CG 21 55) needs to be issued.
(8)    Total Pollution Exclusion with a Building Heating,
Cooling and Dehumidifying Equipment Exception and
a Hostile Fire Exception (CG 21 65). This endorsement
is applicable only when the insurer is willing to modify its
absolute pollution exclusion with both exceptions. This
endorsement’s title was amended with the 2004 revisions
to include reference to the cooling and dehumidifying
equipment exception. Thus, this endorsement, although
entitled as being a total exclusion, makes an exception for
bodily injury produced by or originating from equipment
used not only to heat but also to cool or dehumidify the
building.(9)    Pollution Exclusion—Named Peril Limited Exception
for a Short-Term Pollution Event (CG 04 28). This
endorsement affects subparagraphs (a) and (d).
Furthermore, the discharge, dispersal, escape, etc., of
pollutants must begin, end, and be reported within a
certain period stated in this endorsement. Also, coverage
only applies for injury or damage due to certain named
perils, such earthquake, collapse, windstorm, vandalism,
and overturn of tanks. In light of the 2004 CGL policy
revisions, this endorsement also provides coverage,
through an exception in sub-subparagraph (i), for bodily
injury produced by or originating from equipment used not
only to heat but also to cool or dehumidify the building.
(10)  Pollution Exclusion—Limited Exception for a Short-
Term Pollution Event (CG 04 29). This endorsement is
similar to the preceding one, except that it is not limited to
certain named perils. Coverage, instead, applies
regardless of the circumstances, but only for a short
period of time. Also, the bodily injury and property damage
must not be a repeat or resumption of a previous
discharge that occurred within the 12 months prior to the
repeat or resumption of the discharge. In light of the 2004
CGL policy revisions, this endorsement also provides
coverage, through an exception in sub-subparagraph (i),
for bodily injury produced by or originating from equipment
used not only to heat but also to cool or dehumidify the
building.
(11)  Pollution Exclusion—Limited Exception for Designated
Pollutant(s) (CG 04 30). This endorsement adds an
exception to subparagraphs (1)(a) and (1)(d) of exclusion
f. for any release or escape of a pollutant specifically
scheduled on this endorsement. This allows the owner of
premises where certain pollutants are stored a limitedamount of coverage that would not otherwise be available
without this endorsement. However, this endorsement and
its exception do not apply to the discharge, dispersal, etc.
of a pollutant listed in the schedule of this endorsement
which takes place while such pollutant is being (a)
transported, handled, stored, treated, disposed of, or
processed as waste; or (b) transported or stored for
others.
(12)  Total Pollution Exclusion (CG 21 98). This endorsement
was introduced in 2007 and is available for use with
Products-Completed Operations Liability Coverage Form
CG 00 37 (occurrence form) and Form CG 00 38 (claims-
made). The problem with this endorsement is that many
products are potentially a pollutant or contain a pollutant.
The insured will still be charged a rate for the sale of the
product but may not have coverage at the time of the
claim. In fact, what begs a question here is, when did the
product become a pollutant? As long as there is no claim,
it is a product. When a claim arises, however, the product
then becomes a pollutant and is not covered.
(13)  Extended Reporting Period Endorsement (CG 28 01).
If the policy is cancelled or not renewed for any reason
other than for nonpayment of premium, the insured may be
able to purchase an extended reporting period for one
year, if the insurer is willing, with the issuance of this
endorsement.
(14)  Insurance Site Definition (CG 28 02). When this
endorsement is issued, it modifies the “insured site”
definition in the pollution liability coverage form to include
coverage for the liability of contractors working the
premises of others.(15)  Exclusion—Underground Storage Tank Incidents (CG
29 78). When the named insured owns or operates
underground storage tanks that come within the scope of
federal regulation, bodily injury, property damage,
environmental damage and cleanup costs caused by
underground storage tank incidents are excluded.
Exclusion G—Aircraft, Auto or Watercraft
Since 1986, this exclusion has undergone several revisions. The
first two concerned negligent entrustment and contractual
assumptions. The third one, introduced in 2001, deals with what is
referred to as negligent supervision or hiring. The fourth revision,
found in the 2004 edition of the CGL policy, makes an exception for
injury or damage arising out of the operation of machinery or
equipment attached to a land vehicle under conditions that are
discussed later in this chapter.
The last revision (April 2013) affects the last exception to
exclusion g. Under paragraph (5) in the exception, there is a
reference to the operation of machinery or equipment that is attached
to, or part of, a land vehicle that would qualify under the definition of
mobile equipment if it were not subject to a compulsory or financial
responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance in “the state”
where it is licensed or principally garaged. In light of the fact that the
ISO filings also are available in the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the word “state” is being deleted.
This revision affects both the CGL occurrence form (CG 00 01)
and claims-made form (CG 00 02), along with the Pollution Liability
Limited Coverage Form Designated Sites (CG 00 40); Exclusion—
Volunteer Workers (CG 21 66); and Principals Protective Liability
Coverage (CG 28 07).The current exclusion reads as follows:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, use, or entrustment to others of any aircraft, “auto”
or watercraft owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any
insured. Use includes operation and “loading or unloading.”
This exclusion applies even if the claims against any insured
allege negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring,
employment, training or monitoring of others by that insured if the
“occurrence” which caused the “bodily injury” or “property
damage” involved the ownership, maintenance, use or
entrustment to others of any aircraft, “auto” or watercraft that is
owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any insured.
This exclusion does not apply to:
(1)    A watercraft while ashore on premises you own or rent;
(2)    A watercraft you do not own that is:
(a)    Less than 26 feet long; and
(b)    Not being used to carry persons or property for a
charge;
(3)    Parking an “auto” on, or on the ways next to, premises you
own or rent, provided the “auto” is not owned by or rented
or loaned to you or the insured; or
(4)    Liability assumed under any “insured contract” for the
ownership, maintenance or use of aircraft or watercraft.
(5)    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of:(a)    the operation of machinery or equipment that is
attached to, or a part of, a land vehicle that would
qualify under the definition of “mobile equipment” if it
were not subject to a compulsory or financial
responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance
law where it is licensed or principally garaged; or
(b)    the operation of any of the machinery or equipment
listed in paragraph f.(2) or f.(3) of the definition of
“mobile equipment”.
The addition of entrustment to the exclusion appears to be more
of a preventive measure, since most of the cases involving negligent
entrustment of vehicles concern homeowners policies. While not all
insureds have been successful in obtaining coverage for negligent
entrustment, it can be a means to obtaining protection when no other
insurance exists for a loss. The way a negligent entrustment claim
usually arises is this: an owner of an auto lends it to a person who is
a careless or an incompetent motorist. Following a claim stemming
from the use of the auto, the owner, along with the permissive user, is
sued. Since the owner does not have auto insurance, he or she looks
to the personal liability coverage of the homeowners policy and
maintains that coverage applies there. Despite an exclusion for the
ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle, some courts have
ruled for coverage. In doing so, the courts maintained that the
resulting liability had nothing to do with the ownership, maintenance,
or use of the auto, but, instead, with its negligent entrustment, or the
insured’s negligence in granting permission to use the vehicle, which
is not excluded.
The second paragraph of this exclusion was new to the 2001
edition of the CGL form and is said by ISO to be a clarification that
could result in a reduction of coverage in states where courts have
ruled that the previous exclusion is inapplicable to negligent
supervision and kindred claims.One such case is Pablo v. Moore, 995 P.2d 460 (Mont. 2000),
which involved an accident that occurred when a truck driven by a
paving company’s employee struck the rear end of an auto. The
auto’s occupants sued the paving company alleging in part that the
owner was negligent in hiring, training, and supervising its employee.
The owner sought coverage under its CGL policy. The insurer argued
that this policy was not intended to cover the injuries sustained in this
accident, since the injuries arose out of the use of an auto, and this
exclusion precluded coverage. The court ruled against the insurer
because the auto exclusion did not clearly and unambiguously exclude
negligent hiring, training or supervision.
It is unclear whether this revised exclusionary language is broad
enough to be all-encompassing. For example, one of the allegations
in the above case was negligent failure to warn of a known danger.
The paving company’s owner drove past the accident site about ten
minutes before the accident occurred and saw a large cloud of dust
created by a state highway broom truck that obscured visibility. The
allegation was that the paving company’s owner was negligent in
failing to use his cellular phone to notify his employee of the
hazardous road condition. Currently, the only specific reference in
CGL policies for a failure to warn is within the definitions of “your
product” and “your work.” Additional reference to failure to warn may
be necessary in the auto exclusion, given the possibility of failure to
warn being raised as an allegation in future claims involving autos.
Like the 1973 exclusion, the current one flatly excludes aircraft
liability. (However, note the exception below.)
The current watercraft exclusion tracks with the 1973 general
liability policy exclusion and the nonowned watercraft coverage
provided in the broad form liability endorsement. Thus, coverage
applies (1) if the watercraft is on shore on premises that the named
insured owns or rents or (2) if the watercraft is not owned by thenamed insured, is less than twenty-six feet in length, and is not used
to carry passengers or property for hire.
Exception (3) of the current exclusion achieves the same effect as
a comparable portion of the 1973 exclusion: the policy covers liability
arising out of the parking of autos on or adjacent to premises owned
or rented by the named insured. However, the coverage does not
apply if the auto is owned by or rented or loaned to any insured.
Thus, the coverage is intended primarily for the parking of customers’
autos, as when the insured provides valet parking services. Because
of the care, custody, or control exclusion, to be discussed later in this
chapter, the insured is not covered for damage to the car being
parked. Garagekeepers coverage is needed to insure that exposure.
Under exception (4) of the current exclusion, coverage is provided
for liability assumed under any insured contract for the ownership,
maintenance, or use of aircraft or watercraft—but not an auto. In
contrast, the contractual liability coverage of the broad form liability
endorsement does not exclude auto liability. An insured with the
current CGL form can cover auto liability assumed under contract
through the business auto coverage form.
The last exception to exclusion g., under paragraph (5), refers to
the operation of: machinery or equipment that is attached to, or part
of, a land vehicle that would qualify under the definition of “mobile
equipment” if it were not subject to a compulsory or financial
responsibility law; or any of the equipment as listed in paragraphs f.
(2) and f.(3) of the definition of “mobile equipment.” That definition is
examined in more detail below, but here it will suffice to say that
paragraphs f.(2) and (3) of the definition relate to certain types of
mobile equipment—cherry pickers, air compressors, pumps,
generators, etc.—that are permanently attached to self-propelled
vehicles. The definition merely states that such vehicles are to be
considered as autos. Paragraph (5) of the exclusion makes it clear
that operation of the equipment attached to such vehicles is notexcluded, even though the vehicle to which the equipment is attached
is an auto and therefore subject to the auto exclusion.
To illustrate, say that while a cherry picker mounted on a truck is
being used by the insured to clear tree branches away from power
lines, a large branch falls and damages a passing auto. A resulting
liability claim against the insured would not be subject to the auto
exclusion, since the damage arose out of the operation of the
equipment attached to the vehicle. If, instead, the truck on which the
cherry picker is mounted became involved in an intersection accident
on the way to the next work site, coverage for the claim under the
insured’s CGL form would be precluded by the auto exclusion. The
insured would need to have auto liability insurance on the vehicle in
order to be covered for its operation.
Meaning of “Auto” and “Mobile Equipment”
The April 2013 CGL coverage forms define the word “auto” as
follows:
“Auto” means:
a.    A land motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer designed for
travel on public roads, including any attached machinery or
equipment; or
b.    Any other land vehicle that is subject to a compulsory or
financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle insurance
law where it is licensed or principally garaged.
However, “auto” does not include “mobile equipment”.
Before one can determine more precisely what an auto may or
may not be, the definition of “mobile equipment” must also be
considered.“Mobile equipment” means any of the following types of land
vehicles, including any attached machinery or equipment:
a.    Bulldozers, farm machinery, forklifts and other vehicles
designed for use principally off public roads;
b.    Vehicles maintained for use solely on or next to premises
you own or rent;
c.    Vehicles that travel on crawler treads;
d.    Vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, maintained primarily
to provide mobility to permanently mounted:
(1)    Power cranes, shovels, loaders, diggers or drills; or
(2)    Road construction or resurfacing equipment such as
graders, scrapers or rollers;
e.    Vehicles not described in a., b., c. or d. above that are not
self-propelled and are maintained primarily to provide
mobility to permanently attached equipment of the following
types:
(1)    Air compressors, pumps and generators, including
spraying, welding, building, cleaning, geophysical
exploration, lighting and well servicing equipment; or
(2)    Cherry pickers and similar devices used to raise or
lower workers;
f.     Vehicles not described in a., b., c. or d. above maintained
primarily for purposes other than the transportation of
persons or cargo.However, self-propelled vehicles with the following types of
permanently attached equipment are not “mobile equipment”
but will be considered “autos”:
(1)    Equipment designed primarily for:
(a)    Snow removal;
(b)    Road maintenance, but not construction or
resurfacing;
(c)    Street cleaning;
(2)    Cherry pickers and similar devices mounted on
automobile or truck chassis and used to raise or lower
workers; and
(3)    Air compressors, pumps and generators, including
spraying, welding, building cleaning, geophysical
exploration, lighting and well servicing equipment.
However, “mobile equipment” does not include land vehicles
that are subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility
law or other vehicle insurance law where it is licensed or
principally garaged. Land vehicles subject to a compulsory
or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle
insurance law are considered “autos.”
The above definition of mobile equipment is both longer and more
detailed than its counterpart in the 1973 CGL policy. To qualify as
mobile equipment under the 1973 policy, a land vehicle, whether or
not self-propelled, must come within one of four categories. The
current definition entails six such categories and several
subcategories. The apparent reason for the more detailed approach
of the current definition is to state more precisely the types of
vehicles that will be given mobile equipment status (and, hence,automatic coverage), rather than leaving the matter of status to
interpretation that fosters both arguments and varying results, as is
the case with the 1973 policy.
Paragraphs a. through c. of the current mobile equipment
definition are quite straightforward and seldom result in
misunderstandings. The remaining parts of the definition do
sometimes create confusion and are therefore analyzed below.
Paragraph d. includes vehicles that might otherwise be considered
“autos” if they were not being maintained primarily to provide mobility
to the types of permanently mounted equipment described in
subparts (1) and (2) of the exclusion. In addition, paragraph f.
includes vehicles not described in paragraphs a, b, c, or d that are
maintained primarily for purposes other than the transportation of
persons or cargo. This open-ended description could include, for
example, a truck maintained primarily to provide mobility to any of
various types of mobile equipment not described in paragraph d.
However, paragraph f. goes on to clarify that self-propelled vehicles
with other types of permanently attached equipment are not mobile
equipment but will be considered autos. See subparts (1), (2), and
(3) of paragraph f.
It is important to note that subparts (1), (2), and (3) of paragraph
f. do not eliminate CGL coverage for the listed types of equipment;
they eliminate CGL coverage only for the vehicles to which the mobile
equipment is attached. Thus, the CGL policy covers the operation of
the attached equipment (for example, spraying equipment while being
used at a job site) but does not cover the operation of the vehicle to
which the mobile equipment is attached (unless the CGL policy is
endorsed to do so). The ISO business auto coverage form covers the
vehicle exposure if the vehicle qualifies as a covered auto under the
particular policy, and it specifically excludes the operation of the
attached equipment.The types of equipment under subsections (1), (2), and (3) of
paragraph f. are primarily those that were the subject of controversy
under the 1973 policy. When the definition of mobile equipment was
first introduced to general liability policy provisions in 1966, some
insurers were reluctant to give mobile equipment status to certain
vehicles that in the absence of the definition of mobile equipment
would have been rated as automobiles. An example is a truck whose
sole purpose is to provide mobility to building cleaning equipment
permanently attached to the truck. As the definition of mobile
equipment reads in the 1973 CGL policy, the truck should be covered
automatically under the CGL policy rather than rated separately
under the insured’s automobile policy.
Indicative of the kind of problems under the 1973 definition of
mobile equipment was a case that involved a pickup truck to which
welding equipment was bolted and welded. The insured had an
automobile policy, which did not list this truck, and a comprehensive
general liability policy. Both policies were with different insurers.
When claim was made under the liability policy, the insurer denied it
on the ground that the truck was not maintained for the sole purpose
of providing mobility to the welding equipment, since the truck was
also used for the insured’s personal use.
In construing the definition of mobile equipment, a Louisiana
appeals court hearing this case held that the truck was a type of
equipment covered by the liability policy. The court’s rationale was
that a land vehicle is mobile equipment if it is designed (i.e.,
structurally suited) or maintained (i.e., functionally suited) for the sole
purpose of providing mobility to the equipment attached to it. The
case is Doty v. Safeco Ins. Co., 400 So. 2d 718 (La. App. 1981).
Because of paragraph f. of the current definition, the vehicle involved
in this case would clearly appear to be an auto under the current CGL
forms, rather than mobile equipment, and would need to be insured
under an automobile policy.Paragraph e. of the mobile equipment definition gives mobile
equipment status to vehicles that are not self-propelled and are
maintained primarily to provide mobility to permanently attached
equipment of the types specified. Liability coverage would apply here
to both the existence and operations exposures of such equipment.
However, when equipment in this category is being transported by an
auto, the equipment is covered under the insured’s business auto
coverage form, rather than under either of the CGL coverage forms,
because of exclusion h. (see below), which excludes mobile
equipment while being transported by an auto owned or operated by
or rented or loaned to any insured.
2004 Revision Affecting Mobile Equipment
The last paragraph of the definition of mobile equipment, added
with the 2004 revisions, attempts to make clear that a land vehicle
that is subject to compulsory or financial responsibility or other motor
vehicle insurance laws is not intended to be considered as mobile
equipment and, therefore, is not covered for its over-the-road
exposures under the CGL policy.
The reference to compulsory insurance laws in the new wording
includes laws requiring insurers to offer or provide uninsured
motorists (UM) coverage. Since becoming mandatory in many states
for both personal and commercial auto risks, UM coverage has
become a thorn in the side of many insurers, particularly those issuing
the CGL policy. These insurers often are required to pay for UM
claims involving injuries sustained by operators of mobile equipment.
The intent has been to cover mobile equipment exposures under
general liability provisions since standard forms were introduced in
1941. In fact, with the 1966 CGL policy provisions, a condition
entitled financial responsibility laws was added in order to certify
registered mobile equipment under financial responsibility laws of
states and Canadian provinces.This condition was eliminated with the 1973 CGL policy, and an
endorsement—Motor Vehicle Laws, CG 99 01 11 85—was
introduced with the 1986 CGL forms to replace the condition. Prior to
this endorsement, coverage, when applicable, was automatic. In
other words, the burden was on the insurer to provide coverage to
mobile equipment involved in accidents on public roads. With the
introduction of CG 99 01 in 1986, the burden shifted to the named
insured to request the motor vehicle laws endorsement when an
exposure arose.
Apparently, uninsured motorists, no-fault, and kindred coverages
were still being required by some courts to be provided by the CGL
form, despite the absence of this endorsement request. So, CG 99
01 was withdrawn and the CGL form was revised in 2004, so that
mobile equipment and other land motor vehicles subject to
compulsory or financial responsibility laws or other motor vehicle
insurance laws are no longer covered by the CGL policy but, instead,
are considered to be autos.
Exclusion H—Mobile Equipment
Although mobile equipment is generally insured under the CGL
forms, there are two situations, set forth in the following exclusion,
when mobile equipment is not covered. The exclusion applies to:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of:
(1)    The transportation of “mobile equipment” by an “auto”
owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any insured;
or
(2)    The use of “mobile equipment” in, or while in practice for,
or while being prepared for, any prearranged racing,
speed, demolition, or stunting activity.The reason for part (1) of the current exclusion is that mobile
equipment while being transported is considered to be part of the
auto and therefore covered by the insured’s auto policy, if any. The
reason for part (2) of the exclusion is to exclude exposures that are
particularly hazardous and require specialized insurance if those
excluded events are to be undertaken.
Exclusion I—War
The 1973 general liability policy war exclusion applied to:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” due to war, whether or not
declared, or any act or condition incident to war. War includes
civil war, insurrection, rebellion or revolution. This exclusion
applies only to liability assumed under a contract or agreement.
Although this exclusion had not, in the past, been the subject of
much scrutiny, insurance buyers should not have been surprised to
eventually see an expansion of the war risk exclusion, particularly in
light of the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center on September
11, 2001.
ISO introduced three war endorsements in 2002 that expanded
the war exclusion beyond contractually assumed liability to eliminate
coverage for bodily injury or property damage arising out of any type
of war or warlike action. One such endorsement, CG 00 62, was
developed for use with the CGL coverage forms. Endorsement CG
00 63 was to be used with the Owners and Contractors Protective
Liability (OCP) coverage form. And, endorsement CG 00 64 was
designed for use with the liquor liability, pollution liability, railroad
protective liability, and underground storage tank coverage forms.
With its 2004 commercial liability changes, ISO withdrew these
endorsements and replaced the prior war exclusion with the new
exclusionary wording that eliminates coverage for:“Bodily injury” or “property damage”, however caused, arising,
directly or indirectly, out of:
(1)    War, including undeclared or civil war;
(2)    Warlike action by a military force, including action in
hindering or defending against an actual or expected
attack, by any government, sovereign, or other authority
using military personnel or other agents; or
(3)    Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped power, or action
taken by governmental authority in hindering or defending
against any of these.
Exclusion J—Damage to Property
Exclusion j. of the current CGL forms is a combination of the care,
custody, or control and alienated premises exclusions of the 1973
general liability policy and various exclusions in the broad form
property damage (BFPD) provisions. When the 1986 CGL forms
were introduced, ISO prepared a chart comparing the then new
occurrence form with the 1973 occurrence form. On the subject of
property damage, including broad form property damage coverage,
the chart stated that the “Exclusions have been completely rewritten
and clarified with no change in overall scope of coverage.”7 There
are, however, some new twists to the exclusions as found in the
current forms, such as the following:
1.    Limitation of the care, custody, or control exclusion to
personal property;
2.    Elimination of the exception allowing coverage for damage
to property in the care, custody, or control of the insured
resulting from use of elevators;3.    Amendment of the alienated premises exclusion with
respect to speculative building;
4.    Limitation of the “faulty workmanship” exclusion to ongoing
operations; and
5.    A limitation on coverage for mitigation costs to prevent
further damage to property of others.
These and other differences between the 1973 and post-1986
versions of the exclusions are discussed in more detail following
quotation of exclusion j.
The current version of the exclusion applies to the following.
“Property damage” to:
(1)    Property you own, rent, or occupy, including any costs or
expenses incurred by you, or any other person,
organization or entity, for repair, replacement,
enhancement, restoration or maintenance of such property
for any reason, including prevention of injury to a person or
damage to another’s property;
(2)    Premises you sell, give away or abandon, if the “property
damage” arises out of any part of those premises;
(3)    Property loaned to you;
(4)    Personal property in the care, custody or control of the
insured;
(5)    That particular part of real property on which you or any
contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectlyon your behalf are performing operations, if the “property
damage” arises out of those operations; or
(6)    That particular part of any property that must be restored,
repaired or replaced because “your work” was incorrectly
performed on it.
Paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) of this exclusion do not apply to
“property damage” (other than damage by fire) to premises,
including the contents of such premises, rented to you for a
period of seven or fewer consecutive days. A separate limit of
insurance applies to Damage To Premises Rented To You as
described in Section III—Limits of Insurance.
Paragraph (2) of this exclusion does not apply if the premises
are “your work” and were never occupied, rented or held for
rental by you.
Paragraphs (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this exclusion do not apply to
liability assumed under a sidetrack agreement.
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to property
damage included in the products-completed operations hazard.
Paragraph (1)—Insured’s Property
Paragraph (1) of exclusion j. corresponds to exclusion k(1) of the
1973 general liability policy. Since the word “property” is not qualified,
this exclusion applies to both real and personal property that the
named insured owns, rents, or occupies. The purpose of the
exclusion is to avoid covering an exposure that can be insured by
some form of property insurance. The only exception to the exclusion,
stated at the end of the Coverage A exclusions, is for damage by fire
to premises while rented to the named insured or temporarily
occupied by the named insured with permission of the owner, thus
providing fire legal liability coverage.The portion of paragraph (1) that follows “Property you own, rent
or occupy” was added in the 2001 CGL revision. This phraseology,
which ISO refers to as a clarification, precludes costs incurred by the
named insured or by others to repair, replace, enhance, restore or
maintain property the named insured owns, rents or occupies for any
reason, including the prevention of injury to a person or damage to
another’s property.
The basis for this new wording is Aetna Insurance Co. v. Aaron,
685 A.2d 858 (Md. App. 1996), which involved a suit brought by a
condominium association against one of its unit owners for costs the
association incurred to repair the unit owner’s glass enclosure in
order to prevent damage to another unit owner. ISO’s explanation is
that the CGL policy is not intended to pay for expenses incurred for
repairs, etc. made on the insured’s own property for any reason. The
exclusion is primarily aimed at insureds involved in environmental
situations where the insureds apply for coverage for the costs
incurred in cleaning up their property because a pollutant has or is
threatening to harm the natural resources. There is a good argument
for coverage in the absence of this additional wording
Paragraph (2)—Alienated Premises
Paragraph (2) corresponds to exclusion l. of the 1973 liability
policy, commonly referred to as the alienated premises exclusion. Its
purpose is to preclude coverage for damage to property that has
been sold, given away, or abandoned. For example, say the insured
sells a building with a fire hazard that is neither disclosed by the
insured nor clearly visible to the purchaser. If the building sustains fire
damage as a result of the undisclosed hazard, the insured will have
no protection in the event he or she is sued. However, the exclusion
does not reach bodily injury and damage to property other than the
alienated premises.One of the problems with this part of exclusion j. is that in some
cases it can create an ambiguity. An example is where an insured and
a subcontractor construct a dwelling. The insured occupies the
dwelling for one year and then sells it. Following sale, it is partially
damaged because of a defect in the work of the subcontractor. The
question is: Did the damage arise out of the premises sold? Or did
the property damage arise out of the work performed on behalf of the
insured? It would seem that but for the construction work in the first
place, the property damage would not be within the scope of the
premises alienated (premises you sell) exclusion j. (2), but instead,
the subject of coverage in light of the exception to the “damage to
your work” exclusion l. This exception states that the damage to your
work exclusion does not apply “if the damaged work or the work out
of which the damage arises was performed on your behalf by a
subcontractor.”
The main difference between the 1973 and current versions of the
exclusion is that the current one is subject to an exception stating that
the exclusion does not apply if the premises are your work and were
never occupied, rented, or held for rental by the named insured. The
definition of “your work” is quoted later but may be briefly defined for
present purposes to mean work or operations performed by or on
behalf of the named insured. This exception makes it clear that the
exclusion does not apply to houses or other real estate built on
speculation, as long as the builder never occupied the property,
rented it, or held it for rental. Thus, a completed house built on
speculation has the same coverage under the current CGL forms as
one built under contract with a property owner, and cannot be flatly
excluded by the alienated premises exclusion, as sometimes
happened under the 1973 policy despite the fact that the loss would
otherwise be covered by the insured’s BFPD coverage.
Paragraph (3)—Property Loaned to Named InsuredParagraph (3), excluding “property loaned to you,” is wording
found on current CGL forms. While both real and personal property
loaned to the named insured could, depending on the circumstances,
be reached by paragraphs (1) and (4) of exclusion j., this additional
wording is likely to tie up any loose ends.
Paragraph (4)—Care, Custody, or Control
Paragraph (4) is the counterpart to the 1973 care, custody, or
control exclusion. However, the current version applies only to
personal property, whereas the 1973 version could apply to either
real or personal property. Moreover, the current exclusion does not
retain the former reference to property “as to which the insured is for
any purpose exercising physical control.” Nor does it have any
exception, as the 1973 version does, providing coverage for property
damage (other than to the elevator itself) arising out of the use of an
elevator at the insured’s premises. Consequently, an insured under
the current CGL forms needs to arrange some other form of
insurance to cover personal property of others in its care, custody, or
control that can be damaged by use of its elevators, if such coverage
is desired. Exclusion j. of the current CGL forms does, however,
contain an exception of liability assumed under a sidetrack
agreement, which applies to paragraphs (3) through (6) of the
exclusion. A similar exception applies to the 1973 care, custody, or
control exclusion and to comparable BFPD exclusions.
The fact that the care, custody, or control exclusion applies only to
personal property should not be taken to mean that the insured has
coverage for real property in its care, custody, or control in every
case. Apart from the portions of exclusion j. already discussed, which
can apply to real property in certain situations, parts (5) and (6) of
the same exclusion can also apply to real property.
Before addressing parts (5) and (6), however, it should be pointed
out that when BFPD coverage was added to the 1973 comprehensivegeneral liability policy, the care, custody, or control exclusion of the
liability policy was deleted in its entirety. In place of the deleted
exclusion, BFPD coverage imposed a number of more specific
exclusions. The retention in the current CGL forms of the care,
custody, or control exclusion as respects personal property perhaps
explains why some of these BFPD exclusions have no specific
counterparts in the current forms. The exclusions omitted from the
BFPD endorsement relate to the following:
•    Property entrusted to the insured for storage or safekeeping;
•    Property while on the insured’s premises for purposes of
having operations performed on it;
•    Tools or equipment while being used by the insured; and
•    Property in the insured’s custody that is to be installed,
erected, or used in construction by the insured.
It is problematical to say whether the current approach will result
in more or less coverage than was available under the BFPD
provisions. However, it seems possible that the blanket exclusion of
personal property in the care, custody, or control of the named
insured could have a wider scope of application than the separate,
more specific BFPD exclusions.
In the 1986 edition of the CGL coverage forms, the care, custody,
or control exclusion applies to personal property of the named insured
(“you”). This means that the exclusion does not apply to personal
property in the care, custody, or control of other (unnamed) insureds
under the policy. The 1990 and later versions of this exclusion apply
to property damage to “personal property in the care, custody, or
control of the insured.”The 1998 revision declared that paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) of this
exclusion do not apply to premises and contents of such premises
that are rented to the named insured for a period of seven or fewer
consecutive days. For example, if an employee of the named insured
rents a hotel room on a business trip and negligently causes damage
to the room or its contents, the named insured’s CGL form will
provide property damage coverage for the insured.
This coverage revision does not refer to damage by fire to
premises rented to the named insured; that loss exposure is already
covered under the fire damage, or fire legal liability, clause of the
CGL forms, which will be discussed at the end of this chapter.
However, the same limit, called the “damage to premises rented to
you limit” in the 1998 and later editions, applies to both the coverage
described in the paragraph above and fire legal liability coverage.
Whether the damage is caused by fire or some other negligent action
on the part of the insured, the insurer will pay no more than the
“damage to premises rented to you limit” shown on the declarations
page.
Paragraph (5)—Property Being Worked On
The counterpart to paragraph (5) of exclusion j. is the BFPD
exclusion of the following:
… that particular part of any property not on premises owned by
or rented to the insured, (i) upon which operations are being
performed by or on behalf of the insured at the time of the
property damage arising out of such operations, or (ii) out of
which any property damage arises.
The only substantive difference between paragraph (5) and the
BFPD exclusion is the limitation of paragraph (5) to real property.The purpose of paragraph (5) and its BFPD counterpart is to
exclude only “that particular part” of property on which work is being
performed by or on behalf of the insured. For example, say that a
subcontractor is erecting steel beams in a building. One of the beams
falls while being attached and damages the work of the general
contractor and other subcontractors. The general contractor, if held
responsible for the loss, should be protected under its policy for
damage caused by the beam, but coverage should not be expected
for damage to the beam that fell.
If considered real property, the beam is excluded as “that
particular part of real property…” If considered personal property,
because it was not yet attached to the realty, paragraph (6), as
discussed below, would presumably exclude coverage for the fallen
beam.
Paragraph (6)—Faulty Workmanship
Paragraph (6) of exclusion j. is derived from the BFPD exclusion
of damage “to that particular part of any property, not on premises
owned by or rented to the insured, the restoration, repair or
replacement of which has been made necessary by faulty
workmanship thereon by or on behalf of the insured (emphasis
added).” The versions of this “faulty workmanship” exclusion found in
the BFPD provision and in the 1986 and later editions of the CGL
coverage forms differ in at least two ways.
First, the BFPD exclusion applies only to property away from
premises owned by or rented to the insured, while the current
exclusion applies to work being performed either on or off the
insured’s premises. This should not amount to a significant difference
in coverage, however, since BFPD coverage is subject to an
exclusion of damage to property on the insured’s premises for
purposes of having operations performed on such property. Thisexclusion has not been carried forward into the current CGL forms,
but they achieve much the same effect through their exclusion of
damage to personal property in the care, custody, or control of the
insured. Thus, both BFPD coverage and the current CGL forms will
ordinarily exclude an entire piece of personal property (not merely
“that particular part”) that is on the insured’s premises (i.e., in the
insured’s care) for purposes of having work performed on it by the
insured. The chief applicability of the current faulty workmanship
exclusion should therefore be to property away from the insured’s
premises.
If the insured is working on personal property away from his or
her own premises, coverage for damage to other than “that particular
part” will depend on whether the entire piece of property is in the
insured’s care, custody, or control. If the entire piece of personal
property is in the insured’s care, custody, or control, damage to the
entire piece of property is excluded by the care, custody, or control
exclusion. If the rest of the property is not in the insured’s care,
custody, or control, then only paragraph (6) applies, and the insured
is covered for the entire loss except for “that particular part” whose
replacement was required because of faulty workmanship. Since the
current care, custody, or control exclusion applies only to personal
property, real property the insured is working on is never subject to
that exclusion.
A second way in which paragraph (6) differs from its BFPD
counterpart is that it is specifically stated not to apply to property
damage within the products-completed operations hazard. This does
not mean that the insured therefore has coverage for damage to his
or her own completed work in every case; on the contrary, exclusion
l., discussed later in this chapter, defines the scope of coverage for
damage to work within the products-completed operations hazard.
However, the exception of completed work from paragraph (6) does
eliminate from the current CGL forms the uncertainty under BFPD
provisions of whether the faulty workmanship exclusion applies only toongoing operations or to completed operations as well. In cases
involving faulty work of subcontractors, it is to the insured’s benefit
not to have the faulty workmanship exclusion apply. This issue is
discussed in more detail along with exclusion l.
A court decision involving broad form property damage coverage
that has application to the 1986 and subsequent CGL forms is
National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA v.
Structural Systems Technology, Inc., 756 F. Supp. 1232 (E.D. Mo.
1991). Briefly, the facts are as follows: SST contracted with Gillette
Company for the erection of a 2,000 foot broadcasting tower. The
land on which the tower was to be erected was owned by a married
couple who leased it to Gillette. SST contracted with a subcontractor
(L&RT) for diagonal rods to be used in the tower. SST also
contracted with KIRX, Inc. to redesign the tower to accommodate an
antenna and transmission line. After SST installed the television
transmission equipment onto the tower and the television station
began transmitting, defects were discovered in the tower. It was
determined that the cracks were attributed to the work of the
subcontractor (L&RT). While SST employees were repairing the
tower and replacing the diagonal rods of the subcontractor, the tower
collapsed and all equipment was destroyed.
All parties involved were sued for damages involving destruction of
the tower, its transmission line, antenna system and associated
equipment, diminution in the value of the station, and lost profits. The
insurer of SST’s commercial general liability policy denied defense
and indemnification of damages based on “damage to your product”
exclusion k., “damage to your work” exclusion l., and broad form
property damage exclusions j. (4), (5), and (6).
Since the tower was considered to be real property, the court
held that the “damage to your product” exclusion k. was inapplicable.
Other reasons why this exclusion was inapplicable were that the
tower was constructed by SST and not manufactured by it, and theother equipment furnished by SST was not “sold, handled, distributed
or disposed of” by SST. (Within this context, “handle” meant to “deal
or trade in,” rather than to touch.)
Likewise “damage to your work” exclusion l. was held to be
inapplicable because, at the time of the collapse, the only work being
performed was the repair by SST of the tower with the replacement
rods, which were not considered to be “your work” (SST’s work) but
rather the work of the subcontractor, L&RT. Furthermore, the
damage to your work exclusion l. does not apply if the damaged work
or work out of which the damage arises was performed on the
named insured’s behalf by a subcontractor. The insurer argued that
this exception to exclusion l. did not apply because the supplier of the
diagonal rods was a material man rather than a subcontractor.
However, this argument of the insurer also was overruled.
Regarding the damage to property exclusion, the court held as
follows:
•    With respect to exclusion j.(5): this exclusion applies to the
tower if it is determined that the collapse arose out of the
actual repair operations, as opposed to out of the alleged
defective rods. The insurer therefore had the obligation to
defend because of the potential for coverage. However, if it is
determined that the collapse arose out of the tower, exclusion
j.(5) will apply and the insurer will have no obligation to pay
damages. However, the destruction of other equipment, for
example, transmission lines and antenna system, are not
excluded by j.(5) because they were not real property.
•    With respect to exclusion j.(6): the tower was not excluded
because the damage fell within the products-completed
operations hazard exception. Such exception applied here, the
court explained, since the work being conducted was treated
as completed in that the work of SST was characterized as
“service, maintenance, correction, repair or replacement.” Theother equipment alleged to have been damaged was not
excluded because it was not being restored, repaired, or
replaced.
•    With respect to diminution in value of property and lost profits:
To the extent there is property damage coverage, both
diminution in value of property and lost profits are covered.
Exclusion K—Damage to “Your Product”
The exclusion of damage to the named insured’s products applies
to:
“Property damage” to “your product” arising out of it or any part
of it.
The extent to which this exclusion may apply to property damage,
whether it involves physical injury to tangible property or loss of use
of tangible property that has not been physically injured, hinges on the
meaning of “your product.” This term is defined as follows:
“Your product”:
a.    Means:
(1)    Any goods or products, other than real property,
manufactured, sold, handled, distributed or disposed
of by:
(a)    You;
(b)    Others trading under your name; or
(c)    A person or organization whose business or
assets you have acquired; and,(2)    Containers (other than vehicles), materials, parts or
equipment furnished in connection with such goods or
products.
b.    Includes:
(1)    Warranties or representations made at any time with
respect to the fitness, quality, durability, performance
or use of “your product,” and,
(2)    The providing of or failure to provide warnings or
instructions.
c.    Does not include vending machines or other property rented
to or located for the use of others but not sold.
The specific exception of real property under part a. makes it
clear that work performed by contractors on buildings, structures,
and other realty is not considered to be the named insured’s product.
Some insurers have used the injury to products exclusion of the 1973
general liability policy (or the fictitious work/product exclusion) to deny
completed operations losses that would otherwise have been covered
under the insured’s BFPD coverage. Similar denials of coverage
under the current CGL forms are clearly incorrect.
Another noteworthy provision is a.(1c). Since the current CGL
forms, like the broad form liability endorsement, automatically cover
mergers and acquisitions for ninety days (see Chapter 5), all the
exposures that confront the purchased or acquired firm are relevant,
including liability for products previously sold by the acquired firm.
Provision a.(1c) makes it clear that the current CGL forms cover that
products exposure. Whether a successor is liable for damage caused
by a product sold by the predecessor does not have a clear-cut
answer.8The fact that “your product” includes warranties and
representations does not mean that product warranty insurance is
being provided, as some insureds might like to believe. If coverage is
to apply, there must be bodily injury or property damage resulting
from such warranty or representation—other than to the product
itself.
However, there should be coverage for physical damage to
another entity’s product in which the insured’s product has been
incorporated as a component. Naturally, the cost of the insured’s own
product (the component) would not be payable, due to exclusion k. If
the other entity’s product is not physically injured, but is merely
rendered unusable because of the insured’s component, coverage for
the product (exclusive of the insured’s component product) will
depend on whether exclusion m. of the current CGL forms, dealing
with “impaired property,” applies to the loss. Exclusion m. is
discussed later in this chapter.
In 1990, the definition of “your product” was amended to include
“the providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions.” This
provision was added in response to court decisions upholding
coverage—despite policy exclusions of the products-completed
operations hazard—for products liability suits alleging the
manufacturer’s failure to provide warnings. The rationale for coverage
was that the products exclusion did not specifically preclude coverage
for liability stemming from the failure of a manufacturer to provide
warnings or instructions for its product.
One of the earlier cases to uphold coverage for this reason is
Cooling v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company, 269 So. 2d
294 (La. App. 1972). This action arose when the insured sold diesel
engines and failed to warn the buyer about the adequacy of safety
devices that would have made the engines safer to operate. As a
result of an accident and injury, the insured was sued based on the
failure to warn constituting actionable negligence. The court ruled infavor of the insured because of the absence of an express exclusion
in the policy for injuries arising out of the failure of the insured to warn
that machinery it sold could have been operated more safely with
additional equipment. For later cases, see American Trailer Service,
Inc. v. The Home Insurance Company, 361 N.W.2d 918 (Minn. App.
1985); Chancler v. American Hardware Mutual Insurance Company,
694 P.2d 1301 (Ida. App. 1985) rev’d 712 P.2d 542; and Keystone
Spray Equipment, Inc. v. Regis Insurance Company, 767 A.2d 572
(Pa. Super. 2000).
The 1990 policy amendment concerning the failure to warn is
directed at those instances when the CGL form is endorsed
specifically to exclude the products-completed operations coverages.
Its purpose is to put an end to the loophole that has allowed some
insureds to obtain coverage despite a specific exclusion of the
products-completed operations hazard. When products liability is not
excluded, the 1990 addition clarifies that products suits based on
failure to warn are subject to the aggregate limit that applies to
products and completed operations.
Exclusion L—Damage to “Your Work”
Exclusion l. of the current CGL forms eliminates coverage for:
“Property damage” to “your work” arising out of it or any part of
it and included in the “products-completed operations hazard.”
This exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or the work
out of which the damage arises was performed on your behalf by
a subcontractor.
Since the term “your work” is an integral part of that exclusion, it
must be understood as well. It is defined as follows:
“Your work” means:a.    Means:
(1)    Work or operations performed by you or on your
behalf; and,
(2)    Materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection
with such work or operations.
b.    Includes:
(1)    Warranties or representations made at any time with
respect to the fitness, quality, durability, performance
or use of “your work” and,
(2)    The providing of or failure to provide warnings or
instructions.
In 1990, the definition of “your work” was amended to include “the
providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions” for the
same reason as that phrase is included in the definition of “your
product.” Refer to “Exclusion K—Damage to Your Product” for the
rationale of this phrasing.
Since the injury to work performed exclusion applies only to the
products-completed operations hazard, it is important to quote that
term’s definition here as well. The definition is similar, but not
identical, to the definitions of “products hazard” and “completed
operations hazard” of the 1973 liability provisions. The 2001 and the
current version of the definition is quoted below.
“Products-completed operations hazard”:
a.    Includes all “bodily injury” and “property damage” occurring
away from premises you own or rent and arising out of “your
product” or “your work” except:(1)    Products that are still in your physical possession; or
(2)    Work that has not yet been completed or abandoned.
However, “your work” will be deemed completed at the
earliest of the following times:
(a)    When all of the work called for in your contract
has been completed.
(b)    When all of the work to be done at the job site
has been completed if your contract calls for
work at more than one job site.
(c)    When that part of the work done at a job site has
been put to its intended use by any person or
organization other than another contractor or
subcontractor working on the same project.
Work that may need service, maintenance, correction, repair or
replacement, but which is otherwise complete, will be treated as
completed.
b.    Does not include “bodily injury” or “property damage”
arising out of:
(1)    The transportation of property, unless the injury or
damage arises out of a condition in or on a vehicle not
owned or operated by you, and that condition was
created by the “loading or unloading” of that vehicle by
any insured;
(2)    The existence of tools, uninstalled equipment or
abandoned or unused materials;
(3)    Products or operations for which the classification
listed in the Declarations or in a policy schedule statesthat products-completed operations are subject to the
General Aggregate Limit.
The injury to work performed exclusion of the 1973 general liability
forms eliminates coverage for property damage to work performed
by or on behalf of the insured arising out of the work or any part of it,
including materials, parts, and equipment furnished in connection
therewith. That exclusion differs from exclusion l. of the current forms
in two noteworthy ways.
First, the current exclusion applies only to work within the
products-completed operations hazard, whereas the 1973 exclusion
applies to either completed work or work in progress. However,
exclusion j. of the current forms, as discussed earlier, does apply to
work in progress.
The second, perhaps more significant difference between the
1973 exclusion and the current one is that the current one is clearly
stated not to apply if the damaged work or the work out of which the
damage arises was performed by a subcontractor. Thus, with
respect to completed operations, if the named insured becomes liable
for damage to work performed by a subcontractor—or for damage to
the named insured’s own work arising out of a subcontractor’s work
—the exclusion should not apply to the resulting damage. Neither,
apparently, should any exclusion apply to the named insured’s liability
for damage to a subcontractor’s work out of which the damage to
other property arises. If, for example, a subcontractor’s faulty wiring
causes an entire building to burn and the general contractor is sued
for the entire loss by the building owner, the general contractor’s CGL
coverage form should cover his liability for the entire amount of the
loss, including the cost of the failed wiring. If, instead, the loss had
originated in work performed by the general contractor, the general
contractor would be covered only for damage to work performed by
subcontractors; there would be no recovery for any work performed
by the named insured (general contractor).As discussed more fully in Chapter 6, this exception to exclusion
l., concerning damage to work performed by subcontractors, was the
leading reason construction defects were held to be covered under
the policies of general contractors. To combat many of these types of
cases, ISO introduced two endorsements in 2001, discussed in
Chapter 6. One of these endorsements is applicable on a blanket
basis (CG 22 94), and the other is a site-specific exclusion (CG 22
95).
Even though these two endorsements are available to eliminate
coverage for damage to work performed by subcontractors on the
named insured’s behalf, some insurers have tried to eliminate
coverage without issuing either one of those two endorsements. One
way is to argue that the exception to the exclusion only applies to
work performed on the named insured’s behalf by a subcontractor
and the one who was performing work was a materialman instead.
(See National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, PA v. Structural
Systems Technology, Inc., discussed earlier in this chapter.) The
second, and perhaps more important way, is for insurers to deny
coverage by maintaining that defective work is neither an occurrence
nor property damage, regardless of who does the work. By taking
this approach, it is unnecessary to take into consideration this or any
other exclusion of the CGL policy, since both an occurrence and the
presence of property damage are necessary before considering
exclusions. Although some courts of states have accepted this
argument of insurers, other states, such as Arkansas, Colorado,
Hawaii, and South Carolina, have enacted statutes aimed at the
restrictive interpretations of the courts. In essence, these statutes,
require insurers to interpret the term “occurrence” to include faulty
work. As a result, while defective work is itself excluded, damages
flowing from defective work are still considered to be a covered
occurrence. In the meantime, some insurers are offering buy-back
coverage in those states where the courts have ruled that the result
of defective work is not an occurrence and where statutes have not
been enacted. However, this coverage, for the most part is inferior.Other insurers have taken the approach of issuing endorsements,
without additional charge, making clear that damages from defective
work are still considered to be a covered occurrence.
The previous BFPD provisions, when arranged to include
completed operations coverage, have a similar effect, which is
accomplished by deletion of the injury to work performed exclusion
found in the 1973 general liability forms. In its place, the BFPD
provisions substitute a similar exclusion, but without any reference to
work performed on behalf of the named insured. When read in
isolation, this exclusion allows for the same scope of coverage as
found under the current injury to work performed exclusion.
However, insurers have frequently cited the separate faulty
workmanship exclusion (discussed earlier with reference to
paragraph (6) of exclusion j.) to deny BFPD coverage for damage to
a subcontractor’s failed work from which the injury to other property
arose. In the current CGL forms, paragraph (6) of exclusion j.—the
counterpart to the BFPD faulty workmanship exclusion—is clearly
stated not to apply to work within the products-completed operations
hazard and thus precludes the possibility of its being applied to a
completed operations loss.
Paragraph (5) of exclusion j. also seems inapplicable to most
completed operations claims, due not to a specific exception but to its
own wording: “That particular part of real property on which you or
any contractors or subcontractors working directly or indirectly on
your behalf are performing operations.” If the named insured or
subcontractors are performing operations on the property at the time
of the loss, it is quite unlikely that the operations will have been
“completed” at the same time.
If the named insured becomes liable for damage to its
subcontractor’s work before operations are completed, one or more
subparts of exclusion j. may apply to the claim, as discussed earlier.That is, if a subcontractor’s faulty electrical work caused the building
to burn before completion, paragraphs (5) and (6) of exclusion j.
would eliminate coverage for the faulty electrical work. Damage to
other real property arising out of the faulty work would not be
excluded. Coverage for damage to personal property arising out of
the faulty work would depend on whether other subparts of exclusion
j.—such as the exclusion of personal property in the insured’s care,
custody, or control—are applied to the loss.
Exclusion M—Damage to Impaired Property or Property
Not Physically Injured
Exclusion m. is comparable to the so-called failure-to-perform
exclusion of previous general liability forms, yet may come to be
known as the “impaired property” exclusion, due to its use of that
term as introduced in 1986.
The failure-to-perform exclusion has had a controversial history
since it was first introduced under standard policy provisions in 1966.
The first version contained an exception for active malfunctioning that
was difficult to understand, and it worked to the detriment of insurers.
The second version, introduced in 1973, has proved to be somewhat
clearer, but it is not quite as “tight” as insurers might have wanted.
The current version of the exclusion seems to address two
weaknesses of previous CGL policies. These weaknesses are
discussed subsequently.
The current exclusion applies to:
“Property damage” to “impaired property” or property that has
not been physically injured, arising out of:
(1)    A defect, deficiency, inadequacy or dangerous condition in
“your product” or in “your work”; or,(2)    A delay or failure by you or anyone acting on your behalf
to perform a contract or agreement in accordance with its
terms.
This exclusion does not apply to the loss of use of other property
arising out of sudden and accidental physical injury to “your
product” or “your work” after it has been put to its intended use.
The policy definitions of “your product” and “your work” are
quoted and explained earlier in this chapter, in connection with
exclusions k. and l. The definition of impaired property is as follows:
“Impaired property” means tangible property, other than “your
product” or “your work,” that cannot be used or is less useful
because:
a.    It incorporates “your product” or “your work” that is known
or thought to be defective, deficient, inadequate or
dangerous; or
b.    You have failed to fulfill the terms of a contract or
agreement;
if such property can be restored to use by:
a.    The repair, replacement, adjustment or removal of “your
product” or “your work”; or
b.    Your fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement.
The effect of the 1986 and later versions of the exclusion is
largely the same as that of the 1973 version. However, the 1973
version applies only to loss of use of tangible property which has not
been physically injured or destroyed resulting from…, whereas the
current one applies to property damage to “impaired property” or toproperty (not merely its loss of use) that has not been physically
injured.
While the definition of impaired property, like the entire 1973
exclusion, is aimed at loss of use of property that has not been
physically injured, the other part of the current lead-in language—the
reference to “property that has not been physically injured”—
transcends loss of use, and in that respect it enlarges the scope of
the current exclusion.
The purpose of the impaired property exclusion is to exclude
damages or costs or both associated with tangible property that
cannot be used, or is made less useful, because (1) it incorporates
the named insured’s product or work, or (2) the named insured fails
to fulfill the terms of a contract—but only if that property can be
restored to use by the repair, removal, or replacement of the work or
product or by fulfilling the terms of the contract.
To understand the application of the impaired property exclusion,
one must read the exclusion and definition of impaired property in
concert. In doing so, one should note the following:
•    The exclusion acknowledges that the incorporation of a
defective product or work into other property constitutes
property damage.
•    The exclusion is inapplicable if the property damage amounts
to loss of use of other tangible property arising from the
sudden and accidental physical injury to the named insured’s
product or work; or conversely, the exclusion is applicable if
the loss of use of other tangible property does not arise from
the sudden and accidental physical injury to the named
insured’s product or work.•    If the property damage did not arise from sudden and
accidental physical injury to the named insured’s product or
work and the property damage was due to the incorporation of
such work or product: (1) if the damaged property can be
corrected or fixed through the repair, removal or replacement
of the named insured’s product or work, then such property
damage is excluded; or (2) if the damaged property cannot be
corrected or fixed through the repair, removal, or replacement
of the named insured’s product or work, then the impaired
property exclusion does not apply and the property damage is
covered.
•    If the property damage did not arise from the sudden and
accidental physical injury to the named insured’s product or
work, and the resulting loss of use is due to breach of
contract, (1) if the other property can be restored to use by full
performance of the contract, then the property damage is
excluded; or (2) if the other property cannot be restored to use
by full performance of the contract, then the impaired property
exclusion does not apply and the property damage is covered.
Based on the above principles, the following are some examples
dealing with the mechanics of this exclusion:
(1)    A contractor’s careless work on an underground storage
tank causes the contents to leak into the ground. The
impaired property exclusion would not apply because the
loss of the tank’s contents cannot be restored to use by
the repair, removal or replacement of the tank.
(2)    A manufacturer’s machine part component, when added to
another manufacturer’s product, causes the machine to fail
to work properly. The impaired property exclusion should
apply to the machine’s loss of use, because the machinecan be restored to use with the repair, removal or
replacement of the defective component.
(3)    Defective roof insulation work of one contractor causes
corrosion damage to the roofing work of another
contractor thus necessitating the replacement of the
insulation and roof. The impaired property exclusion should
not be applicable because the resulting corrosion damage
to property of others cannot be eliminated through the
repair, removal or replacement of the defective roof
insulation.
(4)    Lumber used to build houses is discovered to be defective
and presents the high probability that the houses may
become unsafe in time. The owners not only sustain loss
of use of their houses because of the potentially unsafe
condition, but also diminution in the value of the property.
Whether the impaired property exclusion applies in this last
instance is a question that cannot be answered. The ultimate question
is whether the houses can be restored to use with the repair or
replacement of lumber. In theory, the answer is yes. But for all
practical purposes the answer is likely to be no, because it may
require the dismantling or destruction of the houses in order to
restore them to use. The answer also becomes one of economics;
that is, whether the required restoration can be done reasonably and
economically.
It is uncertain whether the impaired property exclusion will
succeed in its objectives or fail like its predecessor exclusions. The
impaired property exclusion’s track record in the courts thus far is
better than its predecessor exclusions but, more often than not,
courts hold the current exclusion to be inapplicable when insurers rely
on it to deny coverage. Part of the problem may be that it is cited byinsurers more often than it should be, or it may be too difficult to
understand.9
Among the cases to be considered is Gaylord Chemical
Corporation v. Propump, Inc., 753 So. 2d 349 (La. App. 2000). This
case arose when a newly purchased pump did not perform according
to its specifications. The purchaser sought refund of the entire price,
lost profits, and additional expenses incurred due to the pump’s
failure to perform properly, as well as damage to its physical plant
and loss of use of some of its other equipment. As to the impaired
property exclusion raised by the insurer, the court held that it was
inapplicable to physical injury to the pump purchaser’s plant,
equipment, or other property. The exclusion, the court said, applied
only if the property was not physically injured or the claimed damages
were solely for loss of use of that property.
Another case is Federated Mutual Insurance Company v.
Grapevine Excavation, Inc., 197 F.3d 720 (5th Cir. 1999). Here, a
general contractor was hired by Wal-Mart to construct a parking lot
at its store. The general contractor hired a subcontractor to perform
the excavation, backfilling and compacting work. Six months after the
work was completed, Wal-Mart discovered that the selected fill
materials provided and installed by the subcontractor failed to meet
specifications and, as a result, had caused damage to the work of
the general contractor. The subcontractor’s insurer denied coverage
for a number of reasons, including the impaired property exclusion.
The court, in ruling for coverage, held that the impaired property
exclusion was inapplicable because the asphalt paving could not be
“restored to use” by “the repair, replacement, adjustment or removal”
of the underlying defective fill and therefore could not be considered
impaired property.
In Shade Foods, Inc. v. Innovative Products Sales & Marketing,
Inc., 78 Cal. App. 4th 847 (2000), the impaired property exclusionwas held to be inapplicable where cereal nut clusters, found to
contain wood splinters, could not be restored to use.
In Dorchester Mutual Fire Insurance Company v. First Kostas
Corporation, Inc.731 N.E.2d 569 (Mass. App. Ct. 2000), the
contractor, while painting the exterior of a house, caused lead paint
chips and dust to go inside the house. As a result, the homeowners
sent a demand letter to the contractor claiming that the latter’s
activities caused them to hire a hazardous waste cleanup company,
vacate the premises, and conduct tests of family members and pets
for lead levels. The contractor’s insurer denied coverage by raising
several exclusions including the impaired property exclusion. The
court held the impaired property exclusion to be applicable because
there was no injury to property apart from the incorporation of the
contractor’s faulty work and no coverage applied for damage to
property that was not physically injured and arose from a “defect,
deficiency, inadequacy, or dangerous condition” in the contractor’s
work.
In Standard Fire Ins. Co. v. Chester-O’Donley & Associates, Inc.,
972 S.W.2d 1 (Tenn. App. 1998), the issue was over the loss of use
of a building occasioned by the installation of a faulty heating system.
The court stated that the exclusion is intended to target situations
where a defective product, after being incorporated into the property
of another, must be replaced or removed at great expense, thereby
causing loss of use. However, the court said that the exclusion does
not apply if there is damage to property other than the insured’s work
or if the insured’s work cannot be repaired or replaced without
causing physical injury to other property.10
For an example of how the current exclusion might operate in a
particular situation, say that the insured installs a heating and
ventilation system in a new building. If the system later proves to be
defective, resulting in loss of use of the building while the system is
being repaired or replaced, the insurer can cite the portion of theexclusion relating to “impaired property” in denying coverage for a
resulting loss-of-use claim against its insured.
There is an exception to the exclusion, however. The exclusion
does not apply to loss of use of other property (i.e., property other
than the insured’s product or work) due to sudden and accidental
physical injury to the named insured’s product or work after it has
been put to its intended use. Returning to the above example, if the
system’s heat exchanger suddenly and accidentally ruptured, the
resulting loss of use of the rest of the building would be insured,
assuming no other policy provision stood in the way of coverage.
Exclusion N—Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired
Property
Exclusion n. is commonly referred to as the sistership liability
exclusion. The sistership liability exclusion derives its name from
occurrences in the aircraft industry where enormous loss-of-use
claims resulted from the grounding of all airplanes of the same type
because one of the planes crashed and its “sister ships” were
suspected of having a common defect. Anticipating similar situations
with respect to virtually any type of product or work, insurers added a
so-called sistership exclusion to general liability policies in 1966.
The purpose of the exclusion was, and is, to preclude coverage
for the costs incurred because products have to be recalled or
withdrawn from the market or from use because of a known or
suspected defect or deficiency. While the exclusion may have more
applicability to products, it also applies to work performed by or on
behalf of the insured. The current version of this exclusion precludes
coverage for:
Damages claimed for any loss, cost or expense incurred by you
or others for the loss of use, withdrawal, recall, inspection,
repair, replacement, adjustment, removal or disposal of:1)    “Your product”;
2)    “Your work”; or
3)    “Impaired property”;
if such product, work, or property is withdrawn or recalled from
the market or from use by any person or organization because of
a known or suspected defect, deficiency, inadequacy, or
dangerous condition in it.
This current exclusion is considerably more detailed than the 1973
version in an apparent attempt to close some of the gaps created by
court interpretations. One of the more notable stopgaps is that the
current exclusion applies whether the damages claimed for loss, cost,
or expense are incurred by the named insured or by others.
In a number of cases, the previous exclusion has been held not to
apply if the actual withdrawal of the product is performed by
organizations other than the named insured. With specific reference
to “damages claimed for any loss, cost or expense incurred by you or
others” (emphasis added), the new exclusion may apply as was
originally intended.
Note that this exclusion applies to loss of use, withdrawal, recall,
etc., of “your product,” “your work,” or “impaired property.” The
definition of impaired property is quoted earlier in this chapter, under
the discussion of exclusion m.
Exclusion O—Personal and Advertising Injury
When the 1986 edition of standard CGL forms was introduced,
the term “personal injury” was newly defined to mean “injury, other
than bodily injury, arising out of one or more of the following offenses
…” This specific reference to bodily injury as being outside the scopeof personal injury coverage caught the eye of some commentators
who noted a potential problem with this wording. These
commentators reasoned that if bodily injury resulted from a personal
injury offense (for example, bodily injury resulting from a scuffle
between a store’s security guard and one of the store’s customers
during a false arrest), the insured storeowner might not be fully
covered. The allegation of false arrest would be the subject of
Coverage B, but the resulting bodily injury claim would not, because
the personal injury definition precluded bodily injury. If any coverage
were to be applicable to bodily injury, it would have had to be under
Coverage A of the policy. However, these same commentators
pointed out that there could be situations when bodily injury still might
not be covered in light of policy exclusion (a), dealing with expected
or intended injury, that is, the allegation that the security guard
expected the injury to happen based on his or her conduct.
As a result of these concerns, ISO made two revisions to its CGL
forms in 1998. One was to specifically include, under Coverage B,
consequential bodily injury arising out of the covered offenses, and
the other was to exclude, from Coverage A, the type of consequential
bodily injury now covered under Coverage B. The exclusion,
designated exclusion o., reads as follows:
“Bodily injury” arising out of “personal and advertising injury”.
By including consequential bodily injury in the revised definition of
“personal and advertising injury” (discussed in Chapter 2), potential
problems in applying coverage for bodily injury resulting from an
offense should be reduced.
Exclusion P—Electronic Data
In the 2004 revision of the CGL form, ISO added an exclusion
pertaining to damages arising out of the loss of, loss of use of,
damage to, corruption of, inability to access, or inability to manipulateelectronic data. This exclusion also contains a broad definition of
electronic data. This exclusion was added to reinforce the 2001
modification that excluded electronic data (as defined) from the CGL
definition of property damage.
Closer scrutiny of this exclusion reveals that considerably more
than simply loss to electronic data is being excluded. For example,
the term “damages” in that exclusion is not a defined term in the CGL
forms. It therefore can include damages for physical injury to tangible
property, loss of use of tangible property not physically injured, and
also bodily injury.
Assume the following two scenarios: While working in a health
care facility, a contractor damages electronic data that controls a life
support system with potentially deadly consequences. Or, heavy
equipment on a customer’s premises short circuits, damaging
electronic data controlling production machinery safety devices
resulting in a worker’s serious injury. In both of these scenarios,
coverage could be argued to be excluded. What is equally, if not
more so, an eye-opener, is the reference in exclusion p. to “damages
arising out of.” The words “arising out of,” as used in this exclusion,
could encompass any injury or damage arising out of the corruption
of, inability to access, or inability to manipulate electronic data.
Understandably, insurers have to be concerned about the
developments of e-commerce, including electronic data, given the
growth in this technology and its far-reaching exposures to loss. Not
to be overlooked, however, are also the concerns of insurance buyers
who cannot afford to retain these risks. Chapter 6 discusses some of
the forms endorsements dealing with electronic data. In fact, at the
time exclusion p. was introduced in 2004, ISO introduced an
Electronic Data Liability Coverage Form (CG 00 65).
When exclusion p. was introduced, it was criticized as being
overly broad in scope, because it appeared to preclude loss to simplymore than electronic. For example, with the term “damages” not
being defined, the exclusion is said to be so broad and encompassing
as to also preclude damages for physical loss or damage to tangible
property, loss of use of tangible property not physically injured, and
also bodily injury.
In light of requests to modify this exclusion, the April 2013 revision
includes the following statement: “However, this exclusion does not
apply to liability for damages because of bodily injury.” Given the
uncertainty about the exposures of electronic data liability, it is
understandable that a broad exclusion be introduced. With a better
learning curve and with no frequency to speak of, other than for
property damage, the time is ripe for this change dealing with bodily
injury.
This revision affects the CGL occurrence form (CG 00 01) and
claimsmade form (CG 00 02), along with the Products/Completed
Operations Liability occurrence form (CG 00 37) and claims-made
form (CG 00 38); Owners and Contractors Protective Liability
Coverage Form—Coverage For Operations Of Designated
Contractor (CG 00 09); Pollution Liability Coverage Form Designated
Sites (CG 00 39); Pollution Liability Limited Coverage Form
Designated Sites (CG 00 40); and Underground Storage Tank Policy
Designated Tanks (CG 00 42).
Exclusion Q—Distribution of Material in Violation of
Statutes
This exclusion was originally conceived as an endorsement (CG
00 67). It was introduced in 2005 by ISO to exclude bodily injury or
property damage arising out of any action or omission that violates or
is alleged to violate the TCPA, the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, or any
other similar statute, ordinance, or regulation that prohibits or limits
the sending, transmitting, communicating, or distribution of material orinformation. The December 2007 revision of the CGL form
incorporated the endorsement wording into the CGL form itself.
Endorsement CG 00 67 has been withdrawn from use by ISO.
The wording of the exclusion in the previous CGL form is as follows:
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising directly or indirectly
out of any action or omission that violates or is alleged to violate:
(1)    The Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA), including
any amendment of or addition to such law; or
(2)    The CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, including any amendment of
or addition to such law; or
(3)    Any statute, ordinance or regulation, other than the TCPA
or CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, that prohibits or limits the
sending, transmitting, communicating or distribution of
material or information.
This exclusion is revised in the April 2013 edition of the CGL form;
the revision affects both coverage A and coverage B. It is being
revised through the incorporation into the exclusion of endorsement
CG 00 68 (now withdrawn from use by ISO) that was used to
exclude coverage for the recording and distribution of material or
information, such as by telephone, facsimiles and email, in violation of
law; in other words, bodily injury, property damage and personal and
advertising injury arising out of any action or omission violating or
alleged to have violated certain consumer protection statutes.
The exclusion revises paragraph (3) as follows: The Fair Credit
Reporting Act (FCRA), and any amendment of or addition to such
law, including the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA).
And, a fourth paragraph is added: Any federal, state, or local statute,
ordinance or regulation, other than the TCPA, CAN-SPAM Act of2003, or FCRA and their amendments and additions, that addresses,
prohibits, or limits the printing, dissemination, disposal, collecting,
recording, sending, transmitting, communicating or distribution of
materials or information.
This change affects the CGL occurrence form (CG 00 01) and
claimsmade form (CG 00 02).
Fire Damage Coverage
The final provision of the Coverage A exclusions is a statement
that exclusions c. through n. do not apply to “damage by fire to
premises while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with
permission of the owner,” thus providing what the CGL forms call “fire
damage” coverage, which is the same thing as fire legal liability
coverage. A special limit of insurance applies to this coverage, as is
discussed in Chapter 5.
The applicability of fire legal liability coverage when the insured
has agreed by contract to be liable for fire damage to rented
premises is discussed earlier in this chapter, with exclusion b. Briefly,
if the insured would have been liable for fire damage to rented
premises in the absence of any contract or agreement, fire damage
coverage will apply; and this is true even if the insured had also
agreed by contract to be responsible for such damage. In essence
then, the insured is covered for fire damage to rented premises
resulting from the insured’s negligence. However, if there are no
grounds for liability other than a contract or agreement, fire damage
coverage does not apply, because of exclusion b and the definition of
“insured contract”.
Reference to the term “rented” in the final provision of the
Coverage A exclusions may, in some jurisdictions, be argued to
require a transfer of money between a tenant and landlord before thiscoverage becomes effective. However, tenants are sometimes
granted occupancy privileges for consideration other than rental
monies, such as the performance of managerial or janitorial duties. To
acknowledge this practice, the CGL coverage forms were amended
in 1993 to encompass such arrangements. The provision as amended
in the 2001 forms reads:
Exclusions c. through n. do not apply to damage by fire to
premises while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with the
permission of the owner. A separate limit of insurance applies to this
coverage as described in Section III—Limits of Insurance.
The revised wording also encompasses situations when there is
no consideration paid as long as the premises are occupied with
permission of the owner or, presumably, the owner’s agent. A
corresponding change also has been made in the Limits of Insurance
section pertaining to the fire damage limit.
Endnotes
1.      See, for example, Garden Sanctuary, Inc. v. Insurance
Company of North America, 292 So.2d 75 (1974); City of
Ypsilanti v. Appalachian Ins. Co., 547 F. Supp. 823 (1983);
and Doyle v. Allstate Ins. Co., 154 N.Y.S.2d 10 (1956).
2.      “Occurrence,” FC&S, Casualty & Surety Vol., Public Liability
M.12; also, “Construction and Application of Provision of
Liability Insurance Policy Expressly Excluding Injuries
Intended or Expected by Insured,” American Law Reports
4th, p.957
3.      Required when a CGL policy is issued in New York is
endorsement CG 01 63 04 09, New York Changes—
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form which, among
other provisions, reintroduces reference to the “groundless,
false or fraudulent” phraseology. As mentioned, insurers may
be able to obtain reimbursement for defense costs incurredon allegations ultimately deemed not to be covered, but they
still have the obligation to defend all allegations.
4.      Whether a countrywide endorsement will be made available
to handle defense costs (as is the case in Illinois and
Wyoming) is likely to depend on what course the issue of
reimbursement of defense costs takes in the near future and
whether such a filing would be approved.
5.      Bentz v. Mutual Fire Marine & Inland Insurance Co., 575
A.2d 795 (Md. App. 1990).
6.      Memorandum to letter from Insurance Rating Board to Ohio
Insurance Department dated May 8, 1970.
7.      The fact that there is no change in the overall scope of broad
form property damage means that the January 29, 1979
memorandum issued by ISO to explain application of broad
form property damage can still be relied upon conceptually.
8.      For a review of court decisions on this matter, see “Liability
of Successor Corporation for Injury or Damage Caused by
Product Issued by Predecessor,” 66 American Law Reports
3d (The Lawyers Co-Operative Publishing Co., Rochester;
and Bancroft-Whitney Co., San Francisco, 1975), p. 824
9.      See, for example, Pete Ligeros and Donald S. Malecki,
“Impaired Property Exclusion: Using Discretion to Make It
Work,” Claims Magazine, Nov. 1994, p. 58.
10.    The court in this case also referred to an earlier edition of
the present text, which gave an illustration of how the
impaired property exclusion would apply to a defective
heating and ventilation system.Chapter 2
Coverage B—Personal and
Advertising Injury Liability
Advertising liability insurance for organizations other than
advertising agencies was probably first introduced for use in the
United States with umbrella liability policies in the 1940s. The first
standardized form for providing advertising liability coverage with the
comprehensive general liability policy was the broad form
comprehensive general liability endorsement, introduced in 1976.
Personal injury liability coverage, packaged with advertising injury
liability coverage in the broad form liability endorsement, had been
available since at least the late 1950s when multi-peril package
policies were first offered. When the simplified commercial general
liability coverage forms were introduced in 1986, personal and
advertising injury liability coverage was included as Coverage B. It
then became an integral part of the coverage form instead of being
an optional coverage added by endorsement. It was not until the
growth of litigation over the meaning of advertising injury liability
coverage in the late 1980s and the 1990s that advertising injury
liability coverage was widely recognized as an important addition to
liability policies.
In large part because of the litigation over advertising injury liability
coverage, Coverage B of the CGL coverage forms has undergone
many changes since those forms were introduced in 1986. The
emergence of e-commerce exposures potentially covered under
personal and advertising injury liability coverage prompted additionalchanges in the 2001 CGL revision. This chapter examines the most
current provisions for Coverage B and also traces significant changes
that have been made to the Coverage B provisions since the 1986
forms were introduced. Where appropriate, this chapter also makes
some comparisons to the personal and advertising injury liability
coverage of the pre-1986 broad form liability endorsement.
Insuring Agreement
The CGL coverage forms provide personal and advertising injury
liability coverage under the insuring agreement that follows.
We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally
obligated to pay as damages because of “personal and
advertising injury” to which this insurance applies. We will have
the right and duty to defend the insured against any “suit”
seeking those damages. However, we will have no duty to
defend the insured against any “suit” seeking damages for
“personal and advertising injury” to which this insurance does not
apply. We may, at our discretion, investigate any offense and
settle any claim or “suit” that may result. But:
(a)    The amount we will pay for damages is limited as
described in Section III—Limits of Insurance; and
(b)    Our right and duty to defend end when we have used up
the applicable limit of insurance in the payment of
judgments or settlements under Coverages A or B or
medical expenses under Coverage C.
No other obligation or liability to pay sums or perform acts or
services is covered unless explicitly provided for under
Supplementary Payments – Coverages A and B.
In several ways, this insuring agreement resembles the Coverage
A insuring agreement described in detail in Chapter 1. The principaldifference is that the Coverage B agreement covers damages
because of personal and advertising injury instead of damages
because of bodily injury and property damage. The policy definition of
personal and advertising injury is therefore a key provision for
Coverage B and is discussed in detail in a separate section that
follows. Notably, the Montrose provisions that apply to the Coverage
A insuring agreement are not included in the Coverage B insuring
agreement.
Insurer’s Duty to Defend
The Coverage B provisions relating to defense are essentially the
same as under Coverage A of the CGL coverage forms. The
insurer’s duty to defend ends when the applicable limit of insurance
has been used up in payment of damages under Coverage A or B or
medical expenses under Coverage C. If, for example, earlier claims
under Coverages A and C have used up the general aggregate limit,
the insured would have no defense coverage for a subsequent
Coverage B claim, even though no other claim had been made under
Coverage B during the policy period. In addition to the general
aggregate limit, Coverage B is subject to the “personal and
advertising injury limit,” which is the most the insurer will pay in
damages for all personal and advertising injury sustained by any one
person or organization. Both of these limits will be discussed in more
detail in Chapter 5.
Coverage Triggers
When introduced in 1986, form CG 00 01 and form CG 00 02
both had the same coverage trigger for Coverage B. The policy in
effect when the offense was committed was the policy that covered
the resulting advertising or personal injury. For all practical purposes,
this trigger operated like the occurrence trigger of Coverage A in
form CG 00 01. Consequently, in form CG 00 02, the Coverage B“offense committed” trigger was inconsistent with the claims-made
trigger that applied to Coverage A of that form. In the 1990 CGL
revision, ISO eliminated this inconsistency by giving Coverage B of
form CG 00 02 a claims-made trigger that applies in the same way
as the claims-made trigger for Coverage A of that form. (Chapter 4
will describe in detail the claims-made trigger applicable to both
Coverages A and B of form CG 00 02.)
Application of the offense-committed trigger, like the occurrence
trigger, is ordinarily uncomplicated. Although there is usually not much
difficulty in determining when libel, slander, or other personal and
advertising injury offenses were committed, there can be difficulty in
determining when an alleged offense of malicious prosecution was
committed.
Malicious prosecution refers to an offense committed when a
person or entity files an action against a person or entity maliciously
and without the probable cause necessary to sustain the allegations
being made. This offense typically occurs in the context of a
retaliation by a person or entity against a third party and often arises
in the heat of anger or for competitive reasons.
In a footnote to the case of Downey Venture, et al., v. LMI
Insurance Co. 78 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142 (1998), the court noted that
malicious prosecution has roots dating back to the 10th and 11th
century, in Anglo Saxon courts, where the price for losing a suit was
the loss of one’s tongue. The footnote went on to explain that courts
have long recognized the chilling effect of malicious prosecution
actions because of their potential impact on an ordinary citizen’s
willingness to report a crime or pursue his or her legal rights.
The majority of jurisdictions hold that the applicable policy is the
one in effect when the action alleged to constitute malicious
prosecution was filed. The minority hold that it is the policy in effect atthe time when that action terminates in favor of the party alleging
malicious prosecution. The rationale for this difference is explained in
the two cases noted below.
In Consulting Engineers, Inc. v. Insurance Company of North
America, 710 A.2d 82 (Pa. Super. 1998), the issue was whether two
insurance companies were required to defend and indemnify the
insured for damages flowing from the tort of wrongful use of civil
proceedings. The basis of the dispute was that the suit alleged to be
wrongful was commenced by the insured prior to the policy periods of
both insurers, although the action continued after those two policies
came into effect. The court held that both insurers had no obligation
where the action was initially commenced prior to the time coverage
under the policies commenced.
In Harbor Insurance Co. v. Argonaut Insurance, 211 Cal. Rptr.
902 (1985), the court held that the offense of malicious prosecution
was committed upon initiation of the underlying action and rejected
the notion that the offense was a continuing one. What made this
case unusual was that it was the various insurers involved who
proposed that malicious prosecution be deemed a continuing offense
over the duration of the malicious prosecution action so that any
obligation to indemnify could be apportioned among each of the
insurers.
Definition of Personal and Advertising Injury
Before the 1998 CGL revision, Coverage B contained separate
definitions for personal injury and advertising injury. In the 1998
revision, the definitions were modified in response to court decisions
that had run adverse to insurers’ interests, and the two definitions
were combined into a single definition of personal and advertising
injury in order to make the Coverage B provisions less complicated.Additional, but minor, revisions were made to the 2001 definition,
which begins:
“Personal and advertising injury” means injury, including
consequential “bodily injury”, arising out of one or more of the
following offenses…
The lead-in language to the current definition states that it includes
bodily injury that occurs as a consequence of any of the listed
personal and advertising injury offenses. An example of such
consequential bodily injury is that which can result when a tenant is
injured during a wrongful eviction of that tenant from the named
insured’s apartment building. The definitions of advertising injury and
personal injury that preceded the combined definition of personal and
advertising injury excluded bodily injury, which could be covered only
under Coverage A. That approach was dropped in the 1998 revision,
addressing the possible result that consequential bodily injury could in
many cases be excluded under Coverage A because of the intentional
injury exclusion.
The lead-in language is followed by paragraphs a. through g.,
which list and describe the specific offenses included in the definition.
The paragraphs are quoted in turn below, with interspersed
commentaries.
False Arrest, Detention or Imprisonment; Malicious
Prosecution
a.    False arrest, detention or imprisonment;
b.    Malicious prosecution;
The first two paragraphs of the definition include false arrest,
detention, or imprisonment; and malicious prosecution. These same
offenses were covered in the personal and advertising injury liability
coverage of the broad form liability endorsement, and they haveremained unchanged in the simplified CGL coverage forms since they
were introduced in 1986.
Wrongful Eviction, Wrongful Entry, Invasion of Right of
Private Occupancy
c.    The wrongful eviction from, wrongful entry into, or invasion
of the right of private occupancy of a room, dwelling or
premises that a person occupies, committed by or on behalf
of its owner, landlord or lessor.
To understand the full effect of the above provision, it is helpful to
contrast this provision with earlier versions of the provision that
appeared in the 1986 CGL forms and the personal and advertising
injury liability coverage of the broad form liability endorsement. The
comparable provision of the broad form liability endorsement applied
to “wrongful entry or eviction or other invasion of the right of private
occupancy.” When the 1986 forms were introduced, reference to
“other invasion of the right of private occupancy” was dropped,
limiting coverage to “wrongful entry into, or eviction of a person from,
a room, dwelling or premises that the person occupies.” Thus, a
complaint alleging personal injury resulting from the insured’s invasion
of the claimant’s right of private occupancy by some means other
than wrongful entry or eviction, although covered under the pre-1986
forms, would not, presumably, be covered by the 1986 CGL forms.
The potential difference between the pre-1986 and the 1986
language for this offense can be illustrated by considering the case of
Town of Goshen v. Grange Mutual Ins. Co., 424 A.2d 822 (N.H.
1980). The question in this case was whether a town’s personal injury
liability endorsement provided defense coverage against a
landowner’s allegation that the town had created economic hardships
that destroyed viability of the owner’s land development project.The endorsement covered the usual personal injury offenses,
including “wrongful entry or eviction or other invasion of the right of
private occupancy.” The insurer, pointing to the absence of allegations
of any invasion, intrusion, or interference by any person or thing upon
the owner’s land, took the position that the allegations in the owner’s
complaint did not come within the policy coverage for the offense
quoted above.
Holding that tangible interference with physical property itself is
not necessary to constitute invasion of the right of private occupancy,
the court decided that the insurer was liable for defending its insured.
Had the covered offense been only “wrongful entry … or eviction,” as
in the 1986 CGL forms, without any mention of “other invasion of the
right of private occupancy,” it seems quite possible that the court
would not have found in favor of coverage.
In the 1990 CGL revision, “invasion of the right of private
occupancy” was added to the definition of personal injury. However,
unlike the pre-1986 version of the definition, the personal injury
definition in the 1990 edition of the CGL policy uses the following,
more restrictive wording:
c.    The wrongful eviction from, wrongful entry into, or invasion
of the right of private occupancy of a room, dwelling or
premises that person occupies by or on behalf of its owner,
landlord or lessor.
Presumably, the 1990 language (which remained unchanged in the
1993 and 1996 CGL forms) limits coverage to cases in which the
alleged wrongful eviction, wrongful entry, or other invasion of the right
of private occupancy was from, into, or of a place already occupied
by the claimant. Thus, the 1990 revision broadened the 1986
language to cover invasion of the right of private occupancy but
clarified that the definition does not include situations in whichsomeone does not have legal possession to property but seeks to
obtain such possession.
Two additional court cases illustrate the problem that the current
language is apparently intended to solve. In both cases, courts upheld
coverage for property owners’ alleged discrimination under the
personal injury coverage phrase “or other invasion of the right of
private occupancy.” In Drought v. Nawrocki, 444 N.W.2d 65 (Wisc.
App. 1989), which involved the pre-1986 language, the court held that
a liability policy’s reference to “other invasion of the right of private
occupancy” was ambiguous and therefore covered a suit against the
insured for violation of a state housing law dealing with discrimination.
In Gardner v. Romano, 688 F. Supp. 489 (E.D. Wisc. 1988), the
insurer was required to defend, under its personal injury coverage for
“other invasion of the right of private occupancy,” a federal civil rights
action by prospective tenants who were refused occupancy to an
apartment by its owner because of racial discrimination.
To summarize, the 1990 and later versions of paragraph c. are
meant to restrict coverage solely to situations where a claimant has a
legal right to occupancy already possessed, and the alleged
tortfeasor is the property’s owner, landlord, or lessor. In other words,
paragraph c. is intended to be limited to a landlord and tenant
relationship and thus would not cover, for example, the removal of a
business invitee (as opposed to a tenant) from the insured’s
premises, because the term “eviction” connotes a landlord and tenant
relationship.
Although that may be ISO’s intent, coverage may not necessarily
be restricted to that intent. A case on point is Insurance Company of
North America v. Forrest City Country Club, 819 S.W.2d 296 (Ark.
App. 1991). The insurer in this case urged the court to strictly
construe eviction as a term limited to interference with a tenant’s
enjoyment of the property. The court, however, disagreed with the
insurer, stating that, while the term eviction has been defined asmeaning “interference with a tenant’s enjoyment of premises,” the
word “evict”, as used in its popular sense also means to merely force
out or to eject. The policy, therefore, was held to be ambiguous from
the court’s perspective.
In 1998, ISO amended the wording of part c. of the definition of
personal and advertising injury to include the word appearing in bold
(emphasis added):
c.    The wrongful eviction from, wrongful entry into, or invasion
of the right of private occupancy of a room, dwelling or
premises that a person occupies, committed by or on
behalf of its owner, landlord or lessor.
Prior to this change, the wording of paragraph c. was not clear
because it was uncertain whether it was the wrongful eviction or entry
that had to be committed by or on behalf of the owner, landlord, or
lessor; or if the room, dwelling, or premises wrongfully entered or
from which a third party was evicted had to be occupied by that third
party by or on behalf of the owner, landlord, or lessor. The added
word clarifies that the wrongful eviction or entry must be committed
by or on behalf of the owner, landlord, or lessor.
Reference to a person in c. (and d., see below) raises the
question whether these provisions can also include an organization. A
case that answers that question and may have an impact on
coverage in some jurisdictions is Mirpad, et al. v. California
Insurance Guaranteee Association, 34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 136 (Ct. App.
2d Dist. Div. 3, 2005). The California court of appeal, in overruling the
trial court, held here in a case involving wrongful eviction under a CGL
policy that coverage for a “person” did not include an organization.
Among some of the reasons expressed by the court of appeal in
concluding that a “person,” as used in the context of “wrongful
eviction”refers solely to a natural person, and not also to an
organization are the following:•    Places from which the eviction must take place are where
people live, i.e., from a room, dwelling or premises that a
person occupies;
•    If a person were to be interpreted to include an organization,
the word “organization,” in the often repeated phrase “person
or organization” would become redundant and surplusage; and
•    The CGL policy discretely uses the term “organization” 12
times and the phrase “person or organization” 20 times.
Fortunately for insureds, there have been other cases that have
not followed the precedent of the Mirpad case. One such case is
Supreme Laundry Service, L.L.C. v. Hartford Casualty Ins. Co., 521
F.3d 743 (U.S. Ct. App. 7th Cir. 2008), where the court held the
language distinguishing between “persons” and “organizations” to be
ambiguous.
Slander, Libel, Disparagement
d.    Oral or written publication, in any manner, of material that
slanders or libels a person or organization or disparages a
person’s or organization’s goods, products or services.
In the pre-1998 editions of the CGL coverage forms, the
paragraph quoted above was included in both the personal injury and
advertising injury definitions. The only change that ISO has made to
this item since the introduction of the 1986 CGL forms is the addition
of the phrase “in any manner,” which was added in the 2001 revision.
This change clarifies that publication of slanderous or libelous material
on the Internet or CD-ROM, for example, is within the definition of
personal or advertising injury.
The paragraph under discussion includes three related offenses:
slander, libel, and disparagement. Slander and libel are two types ofdefamation, a tort that refers to harming a person’s or organization’s
reputation by publication of a false statement. Originally, libel was
defamation that occurred through written or printed material, and
slander was defamation that was conveyed by speech. Libel now
includes various media such as pictures, cartoons, signs, statues, and
motion pictures. An accepted legal definition of disparagement of
goods is “a statement about a competitor’s goods which is untrue or
misleading and is made to influence or tends to influence the public
not to buy” (Black’s Law Dictionary, 6th edition). By their traditional
legal definitions, libel and slander are applicable only to the defaming
of a person or an organization, whereas disparagement of goods,
products, or services relates to statements about the goods,
products, or services themselves.
Violation of a Person’s Right of Privacy
e.    Oral or written publication, in any manner, of material that
violates a person’s right of privacy.
This paragraph, like the preceding one, was included in both the
personal injury and advertising injury definitions in the pre-1998 CGL
coverage forms. The only change that this paragraph has undergone
since 1986 is the addition of the phrase “in any manner” in 2001.
Violation of a person’s right of privacy can occur in various ways,
such as public disclosure of private facts or unauthorized release of
confidential information. Thus, many types of insureds are well
advised to have coverage against this offense.
Unauthorized Use, Infringement
f.     The use of another’s advertising idea in your
“advertisement”; or
g.    Infringing upon another’s copyright, trade dress or slogan in
your “advertisement”.These advertising injury offenses underwent substantial change in
the 1998 CGL revision. Until the 1998 CGL revision, these offenses
were expressed in the CGL coverage forms as follows:
c.    Misappropriation of advertising ideas or style of doing
business; or
d.    Infringement of copyright, title or slogan.
According to ISO, it omitted the reference to “style of doing
business” from the new paragraph f. because that language has been
the subject of coverage disputes. ISO replaced “style of doing
business” with the term “trade dress” under new paragraph g. ISO
has described trade dress as “the totality of elements in which a
product or service is packaged or presented.”1 Black’s Law
Dictionary (6th edition) defines “trade dress” as: “the total
appearance and image of a product, including features such as size,
texture, shape, color, graphics, and even particular advertising and
marketing techniques used to promote its sale.” The term trade
dress, under certain facts, may thus encompass the misappropriation
of a style of doing business, something ISO apparently is seeking to
avoid by having deleted specific reference to “misappropriation of
style of doing business.”
ISO’s stated reason for omitting the word “title” from new
paragraph g. was that some court cases involving the prior Coverage
B language had held the term “title” to include “infringement of
trademark,” an offense that ISO never intended to be covered under
personal and advertising injury liability coverage of the CGL policy.
ISO also expressed the opinion in its filing circular for the 1998
changes that the phrase “infringement of copyright” is broad enough
to encompass infringement of publication titles, such as titles of
books or songs.2Because the pre-1998 CGL forms included paragraphs c. and d.
(as shown above) in the definition of advertising injury only (and not in
the definition of personal injury), the described offenses were covered
only when committed in the course of advertising the named insured’s
goods, products, or services. In the 1998 and later forms,
paragraphs f. and g. of the new definition similarly restrict coverage
to offenses committed in the named insured’s advertisement. The
definition of advertisement that was added to the 1998 CGL forms is
as follows.
“Advertisement” means a notice that is broadcast or published to
the general public or specific market segments about your
goods, products or services for the purpose of attracting
customers or supporters.
With the 2001 revision, the following qualification was added to
the definition of advertisement to clarify that material placed on the
Internet will, under the circumstances described, be considered an
advertisement.
For purposes of this definition:
a.    Notices that are published include material placed on the
Internet or on similar electronic means of communication;
and
b.    Regarding web-sites, only that part of a web-site that is
about your goods, products or services for the purposes of
attracting customers or supporters is considered an
advertisement.
Exclusions
In the 1986, 1990, 1992, and 1993 editions of the CGL coverage
forms, Coverage B had four exclusions that applied to both personalinjury and advertising injury liability, and another four exclusions that
applied only to advertising injury. In the 1996 CGL revision, two
exclusions were added with the intent of eliminating coverage for any
claim resulting from pollution, including cleanup costs. In 1998, when
the prior definitions of personal injury and advertising injury were
combined into a single definition of personal and advertising injury, the
Coverage B exclusions were extensively revised and reformatted.
Again in 2001, the exclusions were reformatted to show a short
name for each exclusion (as in the Coverage A exclusions) and
expanded to address emerging e-commerce issues. The Coverage B
exclusions from the CGL forms are discussed below, with
comparisons to the prior Coverage B exclusions. The exclusions are
discussed in the order in which they appear in the coverage forms.
Exclusion A—“K nowing Violation of Rights of Another”
“Personal and advertising injury” caused by or at the direction of
the insured with the knowledge that the act would violate the
rights of another and would inflict “personal and advertising
injury”.
The broad form liability endorsement contained an exclusion of
advertising injury “arising out of any act committed by the insured with
actual malice.” This exclusion was omitted from the simplified CGL
coverage forms when they were introduced in 1986, perhaps
because the drafters felt that it would be extremely difficult for
insurers to deny coverage on the basis of an exclusion requiring the
insurer to prove malice on the part of the insured.
In the 1998 CGL revision, ISO added the exclusion quoted above
the preceding paragraph. The new exclusion is worded very
differently from the earlier exclusion of malicious acts, but both
exclusions have a similar intent: to prevent the insurer from having to
pay for injury caused intentionally by the insured. To understand thisexclusion, one needs to keep in mind that Coverage B covers the
insured against certain described offenses (such as libel and slander)
that result from intentional acts (such as publishing a report or making
a public statement). The present exclusion is aimed at eliminating
coverage only in situations when the insured commits a personal and
advertising injury offense knowing that the act will violate another’s
rights and be injurious. The exclusion thus should not be considered to
be an intentional acts exclusion. Personal and advertising injury
resulting from an intentional act of the insured is covered if the
insured did not know that the act would violate the rights of another
person or organization and cause injury.
Exclusion B—“M aterial Published with Knowledge of
Falsity”
Personal and advertising injury arising out of oral or written
publication, in any manner, of material, if done by or at the
direction of the insured with knowledge of its falsity.
The broad form liability endorsement contained an exclusion
similar to the one quoted above, which has remained virtually
unchanged since it was included in the 1986 CGL forms. Although
more narrowly focused than exclusion a., exclusion b. shares the
same basic purpose of preventing the insurer from having to pay for
injury resulting from acts that the insured knew were capable of
causing injury. See, for example, Chrysler Insurance Co. v.
Greenspoint Dodge of Houston, Inc., 297 S.W.2d 248 (TX, 2009),
which involved a suit for defamation coverage. The court of appeals
concluded that this exclusion did not apply to the corporation because
no corporate officer knew that the defamatory statements, made by
other corporate employees, were false. On petition for review,
however, it was held that a corporation’s knowledge is not limited to
what officers know, but may include other employees’ knowledge, if
they are corporate vice-principals, such as the corporation’s general
manager, comptroller, and used car sales manager. In GTE Sw., Inc.v. Bruce, 998 S.W.2d 605 (TX, 1999), it was stated that “A vice-
principal represents the corporation in its corporate capacity and
includes persons who have authority to employ, direct, and discharge
servants of the master, and those to whom a master has confided the
management of the whole or a department or division of his
business.”
Exclusion b. is aimed mainly at libel, slander, and disparagement
claims, in instances where the insured knew that the material being
made public was false. Exclusion a. can apply to a wider range of
claims.
Note that in 2001, ISO introduced a revision that included the
phrase “in any manner” in the appropriate provisions of Coverage B,
such as with libel, slander and disparagement. This change was
intended to clarify that publication of slanderous or libelous material
via the Internet or CD-ROM was within the definition of personal and
advertising injury. To be consistent with the foregoing, exclusion b. in
the newly revised CGL form dealing with material published with
knowledge of falsity likewise now includes the phrase “in any
manner.”
This revision dealing with exclusion b. of Coverage B affects both
the CGL occurrence form (CG 00 01) and claims-made form (CG 00
02).
Exclusion C—“M aterial Published Prior to Policy
Period”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of oral or written
publication, in any manner, of material whose first publication
took place before the beginning of the policy period.This exclusion, like exclusion b., has not been materially changed
since it was included in the 1986 CGL forms, and the broad form
liability endorsement contained a similar exclusion. The exclusion has
two versions. The version quoted above appears in form CG 00 01,
which has the offense committed trigger for Coverage B, described
earlier in this chapter. Another version of the exclusion appears in
form CG 00 02, which has a claims-made trigger for Coverage B.
The claims-made version of the exclusion applies to publications that
first take place before the policy’s retroactive date (if any).
Although this exclusion has been included in personal injury forms
since 1950, its use has taken on more importance as more use of the
Internet brings about more liability involving the publication of material.
The purpose of this exclusion is to prevent the current policy from
having to pay claims arising out of material published before the
current policy period (or before a claims-made policy’s retroactive
date)—even if publication might have continued into the current policy
period. In the absence of such an exclusion, an insured might argue
successfully that all policies in effect while material was published
should apply to any personal and advertising injury claims arising out
of that material—a result that insurers have gone to great lengths in
their policy drafting to avoid.
One of the cases that dealt with this exclusion is
Superperformance International v. Hartford Casualty Co. Ins. Co.,
203 F. Supp. 2d 587 (E.D. Va., 2002). The named insured,
Superperformance, was sued for allegedly having infringed on the
trademark rights of the plaintiffs. Several months later, it purchased a
commercial general liability policy with an effective date of March 9,
2001. On August 24, 2001, subsequent to the issuance of that policy,
the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint. The named insured then
tendered the defense of the amended complaint to its insurer which
promptly denied coverage. The court ruled against the named
insured, in part based on the exclusion applicable where the offense
arises out of material first published prior to the policy’s issuance.The court rejected the notion that there was a duty to defend the
second complaint, given that allegations were the same as in the
initial complaint with minor exceptions.
Note that the 2013 revised CGL form adds the phrase “in any
manner” to the exclusion just as in exclusion b.
Exclusion D—“C riminal Acts”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of a criminal act
committed by or at the direction of the insured.
Before the 1998 CGL revision, Coverage B contained an exclusion
of injury “arising out of the willful violation of a penal statute or
ordinance committed by or with the consent of the insured.” In the
1998 revision, ISO adopted a new exclusion that applied to personal
and advertising injury “arising out of a criminal act committed by or at
the direction of any insured.” ISO believed that the new exclusion was
a “more concrete and somewhat broader exclusion” than its
predecessor.3
The 2001 version of the exclusion was modified to refer to a
criminal act committed by or at the direction of “the” insured, instead
of “any” insured. The difference between “the insured” and “any
insured” can be crucial to coverage. “The insured” is properly
interpreted to mean only the insured against whom a claim is being
made, whereas “any insured” could be anyone who qualifies as an
insured under the policy even if not the insured against whom a claim
is being made.4
To illustrate how coverage could depend on this wording, say that
the named insured is sued by a person who alleges that the named
insured’s employee committed an act that constituted personal and
advertising injury and was also a criminal act. Although the employeeis an insured under the policy, he is not the insured against whom a
claim is being made. Thus, the possibility that the employee
committed a criminal act does not bring the claim within the exclusion
that appears in the 2001 forms. However, the 1998 version of the
exclusion could apply, since the employee, though not the insured
being sued, qualifies as any insured.
Exclusion E—“C ontractual Liability”
“Personal and advertising injury” for which the insured has
assumed liability in a contract or agreement. This exclusion does
not apply to liability for damages that the insured would have in
the absence of the contract or agreement.
This exclusion has not changed since it was introduced in the 1986
CGL forms, and a similar exclusion was contained in personal and
advertising injury liability coverage of the broad form liability
endorsement. Exclusion e. is comparable in purpose to the
contractual liability exclusion that applies to Coverage A, but the
Coverage B exclusion does not have any exception for liability
assumed under an insured contract as defined in the policy. Thus,
unless the insured would be liable in the absence of the contract,
Coverage B does not extend coverage for personal and advertising
injury liability that the insured assumes under a contract, even though
the contract is one of those included in the policy definition of insured
contract. Unless an organization can obtain coverage for this
exposure under an endorsement or an independently filed form, the
organization should carefully review all hold harmless and indemnity
agreements it enters into to make sure that they don’t make the
organization responsible for any type of injury that does not fall within
the CGL policy definitions of bodily injury and property damage,
because those are the only types of injury for which the CGL policy
provides contractual liability coverage.
Exclusion F—“B reach of Contract”Personal and advertising injury arising out of a breach of
contract, except an implied contract to use another’s advertising
idea in your “advertisement”.
The earlier editions of the CGL coverage forms all contain an
exclusion of advertising injury arising out of a breach of contract, and
the broad form liability endorsement also contained such an exclusion.
A basic purpose of this exclusion is to clarify that personal and
advertising injury liability coverage is not intended to cover products
liability actions based on breach of warranty.
The version of the exclusion quoted above the preceding
paragraph first appeared with the 1998 CGL revision. The only thing
about the current exclusion that has changed from earlier editions is
the exception to the exclusion. The change in wording corresponds to
the omission of “misappropriation of advertising ideas” from the 1998
definition of “personal and advertising injury.” The new exception to
the exclusion—“an implied contract to use another’s advertising
idea”—corresponds to the new covered offense (“the use of
another’s advertising idea”) that replaced “misappropriation of
advertising ideas” in the definition of “personal and advertising injury.”
(An implied contract is an agreement that is legitimately inferred from
the conduct of the parties or by the law as a matter of reason and
justice.)
Exclusion G—“Q uality or Performance of Goods—
Failure to Conform to Statements”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the failure of
goods, products or services to conform with any statement of
quality or performance made in your “advertisement”.
This exclusion has been included in the CGL coverage forms since
they were introduced in 1986. The last four words of the version
quoted above were added as part of the 1998 CGL revision when thepersonal injury and advertising injury definitions were combined into
one. The exclusion is aimed at preventing insurers from having to pay
claims made by consumers who are disappointed with the quality or
performance of the insured’s goods, products, or services. The
exclusion is somewhat comparable in intent to the failure to perform
exclusion that existed in the 1973 comprehensive general liability
policy and the impaired property exclusion under Coverage A of the
current CGL coverage forms.
Exclusion H—“W rong Description of Prices”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the wrong
description of the price of goods, products or services stated in
your “advertisement”.
This exclusion has been part of the CGL coverage forms since
they were introduced in 1986, and the broad form liability
endorsement contained a similar exclusion. The exclusion clarifies that
there is no coverage for claims alleging (for example) that the insured
should be compelled to sell a $4,999 product at the erroneously
advertised price of $4.99.
Exclusion I—“Infringement of Copyright, Patent,
Trademark or Trade Secret”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the infringement of
copyright, patent, trademark, trade secret or other intellectual
property rights. Under this exclusion, such other intellectual
property rights do not include the use of another’s advertising
idea in your advertisement”. However, this exclusion does not
apply to infringement, in your “advertisement”, of copyright, trade
dress or slogan.
The broad form liability endorsement that preceded the simplified
CGL coverage forms contained an exclusion of advertising injuryarising out of infringement of trademark, service mark, or trade name,
other than titles or slogans. This exclusion was omitted from the 1986
simplified CGL coverage forms, perhaps on the assumption that
these types of infringement did not need to be excluded because they
were not specifically covered by the new definitions of personal injury
and advertising injury. However, some court decisions found that
Coverage B of the simplified CGL forms covered trademark
infringement because the definition of advertising injury included
“infringement of … title.” As discussed earlier in this chapter, ISO has
eliminated “infringement of … title” from the new definition of personal
and advertising injury. In addition, ISO added the exclusion quoted
above this paragraph with its 2001 CGL revision.
The first sentence of the first part of this exclusion was clarified in
2007 with the addition of the second sentence to clarify the fact that
“the use of another’s advertising idea in your advertisement” is still
included in the definition of personal and advertising injury. Exclusion
(i), according to ISO, also will not be used to deny personal and
advertising injury coverage to an insured should a claim arise against
it based on the use of another’s idea in the named insured’s
advertisements.
The exception to the exclusion is important because it restores
coverage for infringement of copyright, trade dress, or slogan that
occurs in the named insured’s advertisement. Outside of the named
insured’s advertising activities, infringement of copyright, trade dress,
or slogan is excluded. And in all situations—even those involving
advertising—infringement of patent, trademark, trade secret, or other
intellectual property rights is excluded.
Exclusion J—“Insureds in Media and Internet Type
Businesses”
“Personal and advertising injury” committed by an insured whose
business is:(1)    Advertising, broadcasting, publishing or telecasting;
(2)    Designing or determining content of web-sites for others;
or
(3)    An Internet search, access, content or service provider.
However, this exclusion does not apply to Paragraphs 14. a., b.
and c. of “personal and advertising injury” under the Definitions
Section.
For purposes of this exclusion, the placing of frames, borders or
links, or advertising, for you or others anywhere on the Internet,
is not by itself, considered the business of advertising,
broadcasting, publishing or telecasting.
The pre-1998 editions of the CGL forms contain an exclusion of
advertising injury arising out of “[a]n offense committed by an insured
whose business is advertising, broadcasting, publishing or
telecasting.” The rationale behind this exclusion is that an insured in
one of the listed businesses is more appropriately insured against
advertising injury under a separate advertisers liability policy handled
by specialist underwriters. When ISO combined the separate
definitions of personal injury and advertising injury in the 1998 CGL
revision, the exception pertaining to paragraphs a., b., and c. of the
personal and advertising injury definition was added to the exclusion.
Adding this exception made clear that the exclusion did not apply to
covered offenses (false arrest, false detention, false imprisonment,
and malicious prosecution) that had formerly been included in only the
personal injury definition (which was not subject to the exclusion).
The other portions of current exclusion j. were added in the 2001
CGL revision as part of ISO’s effort to address e-commerce issues.
With the growth of e-commerce, new types of businesses came into
existence that, like conventional advertisers and publishers, were
highly exposed to advertising liability. Thus, the 2001 version of theexclusion applies also to Web site designers and various types of
Internet-related businesses, subject to the exception contained in the
exclusion’s final paragraph, which describes various Internet activities
(such as placing Web site links) that, in and of themselves, are not
considered to be the business of advertising, broadcasting,
publishing, or telecasting.
Exclusion K—“E lectronic Chatrooms or Bulletin
Boards”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of an electronic
chatroom or bulletin board the insured hosts, owns, or over
which the insured exercises control.
This exclusion appeared in the 2001 CGL revision as part of ISO’s
effort to address e-commerce issues. Firms that conduct these
excluded activities will need to find appropriate coverage under the e-
commerce policies that some insurers are now offering. (Note that
ISO does have an e-commerce policy, EC 00 10 11 09. It is named
the Information Security Protection Policy.)
Exclusion L—“U nauthorized Use of Another’s Name or
Product”
“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the unauthorized
use of another’s name or product in your email address, domain
name or metatag, or any other similar tactics to mislead
another’s potential customers.
ISO added this exclusion in its 2001 CGL revision to address yet
another loss exposure that has arisen with the development of e-
commerce.
Exclusion M—“P ollution”“Personal and advertising injury” arising out of the actual, alleged
or threatened discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release
or escape of “pollutants” at any time.
Exclusion N—“P ollution-Related”
Any loss, cost or expense arising out of any:
(1)    Request, demand, order or statutory or regulatory
requirement that any insured or others test for, monitor,
cleanup, remove, contain, treat, detoxify or neutralize, or in
any way respond to, or assess the effects of, “pollutants”;
or
(2)    Claim or suit by or on behalf of a governmental authority
for damages because of testing for, monitoring, cleaning
up, removing, containing, treating, detoxifying or
neutralizing, or in any way responding to, or assessing the
effects of, “pollutants”.
In combination, these two exclusions are intended to eliminate
coverage for any pollution claim made under Coverage B. The
Coverage B pollution exclusions do not contain any of the exceptions
that allow limited coverage under the pollution exclusion that applies
under Coverage A.
Exclusion O—“W ar”
In the 2004 revision, ISO added to Coverage B the same war
exclusion that appears under Coverage A. This action reflects the
concern of insurers that plaintiffs could make allegations for injury
resulting from war in terms that might trigger a duty to defend, or
even pay damages under Coverage B of the CGL policy.Exclusion P—Distribution of Material in Violation of
Statutes
This exclusion, originally conceived as an endorsement (CG 00
67), has an exact counterpart with the Coverage A exclusions. It was
introduced in 2005 by ISO to exclude personal and advertising injury
arising out of any action or omission that violates or is alleged to
violate the TCPA, the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, or any other similar
statute, ordinance, or regulation that prohibits or limits the sending,
transmitting, communicating, or distribution of material or information.
The December 2007 revision of the CGL form has now incorporated
the endorsement wording into the CGL form itself. Endorsement CG
00 67 has been withdrawn from use by ISO. And, the April 2013
revision incorporates the wording of endorsement CG 00 68, which
has now been withdrawn from use by ISO.
The wording of the exclusion is as follows:
“Personal and advertising injury” arising directly or indirectly out of
any action or omission that violates or is alleged to violate:
(1)    The Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA), including
any amendment of or addition to such law; or
(2)    The CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, including any amendment of
or addition to such law; or
(3)    The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), and any
amendment of or addition to such law, including the Fair
and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA; or
(4)    Any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation,
other than the TCPA, CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 or FCRA
and their amendments and additions, that addresses,
prohibits, or limits the printing, dissemination, disposal,collecting, recording, sending, transmitting, communicating
or distribution of materials or information.
Endnotes
1.      Insurance Services Office, Inc., ISO Circular LI-GL-98-3,
1998 General Liability Multistate Forms Revision To Be
Submitted, January 6, 1998, pp. 17-18.
2.      ISO Circular LI-GL-98-3, p. 18.
3.      ISO Circular LI-GL-98-3, p. 20.
4.      This interpretation is supported by the CGL condition titled
Separation of Insureds, which states that “this insurance
applies … separately to each insured against whom claim is
made or ‘suit’ is brought.” If the insurance applies separately
to the insured against whom claim is being made, “the
insured” can properly be interpreted to mean that insured and
no other.Chapter 3
Coverage C—Medical Payments
Before the simplified CGL coverage forms were introduced in
1986, medical payments coverage was available by endorsement to
general liability policies. Provisions for medical payments coverage
are now included as Coverage C in the CGL coverage forms. Medical
payments coverage provides a limited amount of insurance to pay
medical and funeral expenses of persons (other than insureds) injured
in accidents that occur on or next to the named insured’s premises or
as a result of the named insured’s operations. This coverage is
payable regardless of whether the insured is legally liable, and so
medical payments coverage can be viewed as a way of making
prompt payment to accident victims and thereby possibly avoiding a
costlier liability claim against the insured.
Coverage C—Medical Payments of the CGL coverage forms is
uncomplicated and is expressed with a minimal number of provisions.
Most of the provisions are straightforward and do not require much
explanation. Moreover, because the stated policy limit applicable to
medical payments insurance is usually quite low (such as $5,000 per
person), litigation over medical payments coverage is rare. (Note that
the med pay coverage is also subject to the general aggregate limit
of the policy. This means that if the general aggregate limit is
exhausted by claims under coverages A or B of the policy, the insurer
has no further obligations under coverage C, even if no other medical
payments claims have been presented during the policy period.)This chapter is brief, providing a cursory description of the
Coverage C—Medical Payments provisions. The provisions are
divided into two parts titled Insuring Agreement and Exclusions.
These provisions have received only very minor modification since
they were introduced in 1986.
Insuring Agreement
The insuring agreement for Coverage C-Medical Payments reads as
follows:
1.    Insuring Agreement
a.    We will pay medical expenses as described below for
“bodily injury” caused by an accident:
(1)    On premises you own or rent;
(2)    On ways next to premises you own or rent; or
(3)    Because of your operations;
Provided that:
(1)    The accident takes place in the “coverage
territory” and during the policy period;
(2)    The expenses are incurred and reported to us
within one year of the date of the accident; and
(3)    The injured person submits to examination, at our
expense, by physicians of our choice as often as
we reasonably require.b.    We will make these payments regardless of fault.
These payments will not exceed the applicable limit of
insurance. We will pay reasonable expenses for:
(1)    First aid administered at the time of an accident;
(2)    Necessary medical, surgical, x-ray and dental
services, including prosthetic devices; and
(3)    Necessary ambulance, hospital, professional
nursing and funeral services.
Covered accidents can occur anywhere within the coverage
territory. However, if an accident does not occur on premises owned
or rented by the insured, or on ways (i.e., a road, passage, or
channel) next to such premises, the accident must have occurred
because of the named insured’s operations in order to be covered.
Another requirement is that the accident must take place during
the policy period. This is the coverage trigger for Coverage C in both
form CG 00 01 and form CG 00 02. The Coverage C trigger is
basically the same as the Coverage A occurrence trigger in form CG
00 01.
Note that the expenses must be incurred and reported to the
insurer within one year of the date of the accident. Also, the insuring
agreement requires the injured person to submit to examination by
physicians of the insurer’s choice, as often as the insurer reasonably
requires; of course, the insurer will pay for the expense of the exams.
Exclusions
Coverage C contains only seven exclusions. This small number of
exclusions is facilitated by exclusion (g), which applies to any bodilyinjury claim excluded under coverage A. Another exclusion having
broad application is exclusion (f), which eliminates coverage for BI
included within the products-completed operations hazard (a defined
term). The seven exclusions are quoted in turn below with brief
commentary on each.
2.    Exclusions
We will not pay expenses for “bodily injury”:
a.    Any Insured
To any insured, except “volunteer workers.”
A person who qualifies as an insured under the CGL coverage
forms cannot collect medical payments. The exception relating to
volunteer workers was added in the 2001 CGL revision, the same
revision in which the CGL coverage forms were modified to include
the named insured’s volunteers as insureds. In the absence of this
exception to the exclusion, volunteer workers would be excluded from
medical payments coverage now that they are insureds. Before the
CGL forms were modified to include volunteer workers as insureds,
they were not excluded from medical payments coverage, so it was
necessary to exempt them from the exclusion of medical payments
coverage to any insured in order to maintain their eligibility for medical
payments.
b.    Hired Person
To a person hired to do work for or on behalf of any
insured or a tenant of any insured.
The person hired to do work could be either an employee or an
independent contractor. Note that the exclusion applies also not only
to persons hired to do work for any insured, but also to persons hiredto do work for a tenant of any insured. For example, a painter hired
by the named insured’s tenant would not be able to collect medical
payments if he or she were injured on premises owned by the
insured.
c.    Injury on Normally Occupied Premises
To a person injured on that part of premises you own
or rent that the person normally occupies.
To illustrate, this exclusion would eliminate medical payments
coverage for a tenant of the named insured’s apartment building if the
tenant was injured in his own apartment. If, instead, the tenant was
injured while walking down a flight of stairs in a common area of the
apartment building, his injury would not be excluded.
d.    Workers Compensation and Similar Laws
To a person, whether or not an “employee” of any
insured, if benefits for the “bodily injury” are payable or
must be provided under a workers compensation or
disability benefits law or a similar law.
This workers compensation exclusion differs from the Coverage A
workers compensation exclusion in that the Coverage C exclusion
applies to anyone whose injuries are covered under a workers
compensation or disability benefits or a similar law; the injured person
does not have to be an employee of any insured. To illustrate, say
that an employee of a tree-trimming contractor working for a cable
television company is injured while working on the insured’s premises.
Even though the injured worker is not an employee of the named
insured, his injuries would still be excluded because they are
compensable under workers compensation.
e.    Athletics ActivitiesTo a person injured while practicing, instructing or
participating in any physical exercises or games,
sports, or athletic contests.
Prior to the 2004 edition of the CGL policy, this exclusion was
worded as follows: “To a person injured while taking part in athletics.”
A question that could come up with this prior wording was whether
casual sporting events, such as a softball game at a company picnic
or a game of horseshoes at a church picnic, qualified as athletics.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary defines athletics as “the
physical exercise, sports, or games engaged in by athletes.” An
athlete, in turn, is defined as “one who is trained to compete … in
exercises, sports, or games requiring physical strength, agility, or
stamina.” Thus, unless the injury occurs in a true athletic event—that
is, one whose participants are trained to compete in that event as
athletes—the prior exclusion should not bar coverage.
Because of questions over the meaning of the word athletics, ISO
decided that this exclusion required modification so as to more clearly
express the underwriting intent. Stating that it received requests from
insurance agents and insurers for a more precise definition of
athletics, ISO, as part of its 2004 revisions, amended the exclusion to
read as reflected above. The ISO Circular announcing this change
provided an explanation that the term athletics is intended to apply to
those participating in any kind of athletics, whether they are organized
or not, because they have accepted a greater risk of being injured.
The purpose of medical payments is to assist those injured in
accidents. It is not intended to be a substitute for a person’s own
health insurance.
f.     Products-Completed Operations Hazard
Included within the “products-completed operations
hazard.”Although Coverage A covers the insured’s liability for bodily injury
or property damage within the products-completed operations
hazard, Coverage C excludes expenses for bodily injury included
within that hazard. The definition of products-completed operations
hazard was discussed in Chapter 1.
g.    Coverage A Exclusions
Excluded under Coverage A.
This exclusion eliminates the need for repeating any of the
Coverage A exclusions that are pertinent to medical payments
coverage. Thus, for example, expenses for injuries resulting from the
use of automobiles are excluded because of the Coverage A auto
exclusion.Chapter 4
Managing the Claims-Made
Trigger
As discussed briefly in earlier chapters, the 1990 and later
editions of form CG 00 02 have a claims-made trigger for Coverage
A and Coverage B. The 1986 edition of form CG 00 02 has a claims-
made trigger for Coverage A only and an offense committed trigger
for Coverage B. This chapter describes the rationale for, and
mechanics of, claims-made coverage in more detail. In order to
handle claims-made coverage properly, it is essential to understand
the effect of retroactive dates, the need for extended reporting
periods, and the consequences of various endorsements for
modifying claims-made coverage.
In the interest of not complicating the presentation, only the 1990
and later claims-made policy provisions are quoted in this chapter.
Apart from the switch to a claims-made trigger for Coverage B in the
1990 CGL changes, any differences between the 1986 and the later
provisions respecting coverage triggers are principally editorial and
not substantive.
Reasons for Claims-Made Trigger
As noted in Chapter 1, the coverage trigger of form CG 00 01 is
bodily injury or property damage that occurs during the policy period.
If someone is injured by the named insured’s product today, theoccurrence policy in effect today will apply to the loss whether a
claim is made against the insured this year or some later year.
The claims-made trigger of form CG 00 02, on the other hand, is
the first making of a claim against the insured during the policy period
for injury or damage that occurred after the policy’s retroactive date.
Using the previous example, if someone is injured by the named
insured today, the claim against the insured must be made during the
policy period (or an extended reporting period, which will be
discussed later) of the current claims-made policy in order for that
policy to apply to the loss. A claim cannot be made at some later
year and still be covered by the claims-made policy of today.
A natural question is why two such opposing coverage triggers
are available for the same type of policy. Consider first the
occurrence trigger, the traditional coverage trigger for general liability
insurance. Ordinarily, the occurrence trigger presents no problem to
the insurer. A customer slips and falls in a store, he or she makes a
claim against the insured storekeeper, the claim is paid by the
storekeeper’s insurer, and the file is closed a few months after the
accident happened.
But not all claims are so straightforward. Take, for example, an
insulation worker who was exposed to asbestos dust from 1950 to
1960. If the worker is diagnosed as having asbestosis thirty years
later, he or she may, despite the passing of so many years, be able
to recover damages under the occurrence-type liability policies of the
asbestos manufacturer that were in effect from 1950 to 1960, if the
insurance policies are interpreted according to the exposure theory
that has been adopted by some courts. The exposure theory, if
applied to this claim, would hold that bodily injury occurred during the
entire period in which the worker was exposed to the asbestos dust.
See, for example, Insurance Company of North America v. Forty-
Eight Insulations, Inc., 633 F.2d 1212 (1980), decided by the United
States court of appeals for the sixth circuit.If the claim were considered in light of yet another interpretation,
sometimes called the triple-trigger theory, every liability policy that
the manufacturer had in effect between the time of the first exposure
and the time of the manifestation of the disease could be applicable,
not merely the policies in effect during the time of exposure. The
triple-trigger theory says that bodily injury occurs while a person is
exposed to a hazardous substance, while the substance is “in
residence” in the person following exposure, and when the resulting
disease manifests itself. See Keene Corp. v. Insurance Company of
North America, 667 F.2d 1034 (1981), decided by the United States
court of appeals for the District of Columbia circuit.
The problems resulting from occurrence-type coverage are thus
quite obvious in latent injury cases. The rate that the insurer charges
for the coverage, and the loss reserves that the insurer sets aside to
pay future claims may both prove to be grossly inadequate,
depending in part on unpredictable factors such as the following:
1.    Whether a substance considered to be relatively safe at the
time the insurance was issued proves many years later to
be hazardous;
2.    The extent of economic inflation and “social” inflation (for
example, the tendency of juries to award greater damages
than in the past) between the time of exposure and when a
claim is made; and
3.    Liberalizations in the law, such as the exposure and triple-
trigger theories.
In short, insurers have come to feel that the uncertainties involved
in writing occurrence-type coverage for some insureds subject them
to an unacceptable risk.The claims-made trigger provides a possible solution to such
problems. In contrast to the occurrence trigger, the claims-made
trigger allows coverage to apply under a particular policy only if a
claim is made during the term of that policy. The insurer will know, by
the end of the policy period, of all claims that may be payable under
that policy. It will not have to reserve for unreported claims, as it
would have to do under an occurrence policy. Thus, the insurer will be
better able to predict an adequate rate for the next policy period. If,
five years later, a claim is made against the insured for bodily injury
resulting from exposure during the earlier policy periods, the claim will
not be covered under any policy other than the one, if any, in effect at
the time claim is made.
The foregoing description, however, is somewhat oversimplified. It
ignores two claims-made features that can reintroduce some or all of
the uncertainty associated with the occurrence trigger. These
features are (1) the retroactive date, mentioned earlier, and (2)
extended reporting periods. Both features are discussed in detail
later in this chapter, along with the other specific provisions of the
claims-made trigger. For now, it will suffice to say that because of the
options that these features allow—both for insureds and insurers—
anyone dealing with the claims-made form must acquire proficiency in
arranging claims-made coverage. Failure to do so can result in
uninsured losses for the insured, errors and omissions claims against
producers, and the insurer’s failure to collect an adequate premium.
Occurrence Trigger Provisions
The provision expressing the occurrence trigger is contained in the
Coverage A insuring agreement of form CG 00 01. It states that:
This insurance applies to “bodily injury” and “property damage”
only if… the “bodily injury” or “property damage” occurs during
the policy period.Essentially the same requirement is expressed in the 1973
comprehensive general liability policy in the definitions of bodily injury
and property damage. So, as respects the trigger of coverage, the
current form CG 00 01 is virtually identical to the 1973 liability policy.
Another trigger-related provision, also found in the Coverage A
insuring agreement of form CG 00 01, is as follows:
Damages because of “bodily injury” include damages claimed by
any person or organization for care, loss of services or death
resulting at any time from the “bodily injury”.
This provision, like a comparable statement in the 1973 definition
of bodily injury, makes it clear that if death results from bodily injury at
any time—for example, in the following policy period—damages for
the resulting death will be considered to be payable under the policy
in effect at the time the bodily injury occurred. The definition of
property damage makes a similar statement regarding loss of use of
tangible property. If, for example, a covered occurrence during the
policy period results in loss of use of portions of a building that are
not physically injured, the resulting loss of use will be covered under
the policy in effect at the time of the occurrence regardless of
whether the loss of use extends beyond the policy period.
Montrose Provision
Another provision that affects the CGL occurrence trigger is the
so-called Montrose or continuous injury provision that appears in the
insuring agreement of form CG 00 01. This provision was first added
to the occurrence CGL coverage form by endorsement in 1999 and
was added to the occurrence form’s insuring agreement in the 2001
CGL revision. The Montrose provision is so named because it was
developed in response to the 1995 California court case of Montrose
Chemical Corp. v. Admiral Insurance Company, et al., 10 Cal. 4th
645.The court decided to adopt the continuous injury trigger which
holds that injury or damage is deemed to occur continuously over time
(often years) as long as injury continues. As a result, all policies in
effect during the period during which injury or damage occurs are
potentially triggered.
The Montrose provision, quoted below, attempts to limit
application of the continuous (or progressive) injury concept. In a
nutshell, if any insured is aware of any injury or damage prior to the
policy’s inception (new or renewal), any continuation, resumption of,
or change in the injury or damage known prior to policy inception will
be deemed to have occurred prior to the policy period. On the other
hand, injury or damage occurring during the policy period that is not a
continuation, resumption or change in injury or damage known to an
insured prior to the policy inception date, will include injury or damage
that continues, resumes or changes after the policy ends.
b.    This insurance applies to “bodily injury” and “property
damage” only if: …
(3)    Prior to the policy period, no insured listed under
Paragraph 1. of Section II—Who Is an Insured and no
“employee” authorized by you to give or receive notice
of an “occurrence” or claim knew that the “bodily
injury” or “property damage” had occurred in whole or
in part if such a listed insured or authorized “employee”
knew, prior to the policy period, that the “bodily injury”
or “property damage” occurred, then any continuation,
change or resumption of such “bodily injury” or
“property damage” during or after the policy period will
be deemed to have been known prior to the policy
period.
c.    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which occurs during the
policy period and was not, prior to the policy period, knownto have occurred by any insured listed under Paragraph 1.
of Section II—Who Is an Insured or any “employee”
authorized by you to give or receive notice of an
“occurrence” or claim, includes any continuation, change or
resumption of that “bodily injury” or “property damage” after
the end of the policy period.
d.    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” will be deemed to have
been known to have occurred at the earliest time when any
Insured listed under Paragraph 1. of Section II—Who Is an
Insured or any “employee” authorized by you to give or
receive notice of “occurrence” or claim:
(1)    Reports all, or any part, of the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” to us or any other insurer;
(2)    Receives a written or verbal demand or claim for
damages because of the “bodily injury” or “property
damage”; or
(3)    Becomes aware by any other means that “bodily
injury” or “property damage” has occurred or has
begun to occur.
The Montrose provision has been court tested but time will tell
whether it will be upheld according to the insurers’ intent. Some
insurers are not utilizing this provision at all, while other insurers are
using their own versions. As discussed in Chapter 1, the definition of
property damage attempts to apply the same concept where it reads:
“all such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the
physical injury that caused it.”
In general, insureds have preferred occurrence-type coverage
over claims-made coverage, due to its straightforward approach.
Still, it can present some pitfalls. If an insured goes out of businessbut still has products or work in existence, injuries resulting from
those products or work that occur after policy expiration will not be
insured under the previous policies. If the insured wants insurance for
that exposure, the insured must purchase a separate policy or
policies to extend protection past expiration of the last policy in effect
while the business was still a going concern.
Another pitfall of occurrence coverage is that the limits of liability
for a previous policy may prove to be inadequate for paying claims
made many years after the injury occurred. If a product of the
insured’s is found to have caused bodily injury many years earlier, the
resulting claims will be covered by the policy in effect at the time of
the injury. Limits that seemed adequate many years ago could be
grossly inadequate by contemporary, inflated standards. Moreover,
any aggregate limits of liability under the policy may have been
reduced by other claims filed in the intervening years.
Despite these pitfalls, occurrence-type coverage is relatively
uncomplicated and foolproof from the insured’s point of view. As long
as the insured keeps occurrence-type coverage in effect at all times,
bodily injury or property damage that occurred during that time will
potentially be within coverage under one or more of the past policies.
Keeping coverage continuous and avoiding coverage gaps does not
require a great deal of expertise.
Claims-Made Provisions
The claims-made trigger applicable to Coverage A of form CG 00
02 is expressed in the following statement:
This insurance applies to “bodily injury” and “property damage”
only if…a claim for damages because of the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” is first made against any insured…during the
policy period or any Section V—Extended Reporting Period we
provide under Extended Reporting Periods.An almost identical provision, applying to claims for personal and
advertising injury, is used to state the claims-made trigger that
applies to Coverage B of the 1990 and later CGL forms.
There are some important points to consider here. The trigger,
first of all, is the making of a claim for damages. Although the named
insured is required, by another provision in the policy, to notify the
insurer as soon as practicable of any occurrence that may result in a
claim, notification of an occurrence alone does not trigger coverage.
There must be an actual claim for damages by a third party. And, it is
the first making of a claim for damages that activates coverage.
Another provision states that the claim will be considered to have
been made once notice of claim has been received and recorded by
any insured or the insurer, or when the insurer makes a settlement
with the claimant.
The claims-made trigger language originally proposed by ISO
required that the notice of claim be in writing. The current language
does not require that. However, when it deleted the requirement of
written notice of a claim, ISO added the requirement that notice of
claim must be received and recorded. Consequently, the provision in
the claims-made form respecting duties of the insured in the event of
a claim was also amended to require the insured to “immediately
record the specifics of the claim and the date received” and provide
written notice of the claim to the insurer as soon as practicable.
Comparable to a provision of the occurrence form discussed
earlier is the following provision from the claims-made form:
All claims for damages because of “bodily injury” to the same
person, including damages claimed by any person or
organization for care, loss of services, or death resulting at any
time from the “bodily injury”, will be deemed to have been made
at the time the first of these claims is made against any insured.To illustrate how this provision might apply, say that someone
injured by the insured’s product first makes a claim for resulting
medical expenses a few months after the injury occurs, and those
expenses are payable under the policy in effect at the time the claim
for damages is made. If, in a later policy period, the claimant dies
from her earlier injuries and her estate makes a claim against the
insured for loss of services and funeral expenses, that claim will be
deemed to have been made at the time the first claim was made. So,
the second claim will be payable under the policy in effect at the time
the first claim was made. It will not be payable under the policy in
effect at the time the second claim was made. Consequently, the
additional claim will be subject to the limits of insurance of the
previous policy. A comparable provision has the same effect for
property damage liability claims.
Retroactive Date
The claims-made coverage form also has a provision for imposing
a retroactive date. If a retroactive date is shown in the declarations of
a claims-made policy, the insurer will not cover any claim for injury or
damage that occurred before the retroactive date, even though all
other requirements of the claims-made trigger have been met.
The retroactive date provision of Coverage A reads as follows:
This insurance applies to “bodily injury” and “property damage”
only if… the “bodily injury” or “property damage” did not occur
before the Retroactive Date, if any, shown in the Declarations or
after the end of the policy period.
In the case of Coverage B (in the 1990 and later versions of the
CGL form), the retroactive date provision is expressed as follows:
This insurance applies … only if … the offense was not
committed before the Retroactive Date, if any, shown in theDeclarations or after the end of the policy period.
When issuing a claims-made policy to an insured for the first time,
the insurer is free to impose whatever retroactive date it deems
appropriate, just as the insured may request (though not necessarily
receive) whatever retroactive date it deems is in its best interest.
Once a retroactive date has been established in a policy, however,
ISO rules permit the date to be advanced only with the written
consent of the first named insured and then only:
1.    If there is a change in carrier;
2.    If there is a substantial change in the insured’s operations
which results in an increased exposure to loss;
3.    If the insured fails to provide the company with information
the insured knew or should have known about the nature of
the risk insured that would have been material to the
insurer’s acceptance of the risk, or fails to provide
information requested by the insurer; or
4.    At the request of the insured.
The considerations involved in selecting retroactive dates are
discussed later in this chapter. Those considerations are best made
after gaining an understanding of the extended reporting periods
provision.
Extended Reporting Periods
To summarize, the claims-made trigger has two major
requirements: (1) the claim must be first made during the policy
period; and (2) the bodily injury or property damage for which the
claim is being made must have occurred after the retroactive date, if
any, shown in the policy. In the case of Coverage B, the personal andadvertising injury offense must have been committed after the
retroactive date. If a claim is made after the policy period ends, the
expired policy will provide no coverage for the claim, even if
requirement (2), above, is met. Accordingly, the purpose of the
extended reporting periods, set forth under Section V of the claims-
made form, is to provide coverage for such claims under an expired
claims-made policy.
Extended reporting periods may be needed in a number of
situations. Consider the following examples:
1.    An insured goes out of business and cancels its claims-
made policy.
2.    An insured’s claims-made policy is cancelled by the insurer
and the insured is unable to obtain new insurance.
3.    An insured’s claims-made policy is replaced with an
occurrence policy.
4.    An insured’s claims-made policy is replaced with a claims-
made policy; however, the new claims-made policy’s
retroactive date is set at a date later than the retroactive
date in the previous policy.
Now, say that a claim is made against each of these insureds,
after expiration of the previous policy, for injury that occurred after the
retroactive date of the previous policy and before its expiration.
Assuming that no extended reporting period applies to the previous
policy, the claim will not be covered under the previous policy in any
of these examples because the claim was not first made during the
previous policy period.
Moreover, the insureds in the first and second examples, because
they have not obtained new insurance policies, will have no otherinsurance. The insured in the third example, even though it has an
occurrence policy in effect at the time of the claim, will also be
without coverage because the occurrence policy only covers bodily
injury and property damage that occur during the policy period. In this
example, the injury occurred before the new policy’s inception.
The insured in the last example may or may not have coverage for
the later claim. Although the claim is made during the policy period of
the new claims-made policy, it will not be covered unless the injury or
damage occurred after the new retroactive date. If, for example, the
new retroactive date is the same as the inception date of the new
policy, the insured will not have coverage under the new policy for any
claims resulting from injury or damage before that date.
The extended reporting periods provision in Section V of the CGL
coverage forms provides, for no additional premium charge, a basic
extended reporting period of limited duration for claims made after
the policy period. The provision also enables the named insured to
obtain, for an additional premium, a supplemental extended reporting
period of unlimited duration for such claims. These extended reporting
periods are also referred to as the basic tail and the supplemental
tail.
The basic tail and the option to purchase the supplemental tail are
provided if the policy is cancelled or not renewed for any reason by
either the insured or the insurer. The tails are also available if the
insurer renews or replaces the policy with one that either has a later
retroactive date or applies on an occurrence basis.
Basic Tail
The basic tail covers claims made up to five years after the end of
the policy period, provided the claim results from an occurrence (or,
in the case of Coverage B, from an offense) reported to the insurernot later than sixty days after the end of the policy period. Also, of
course, the bodily injury or property damage must have occurred (or
the personal or advertising injury offense must have been committed)
before the end of the policy period and after the applicable
retroactive date.
To illustrate, say that a customer is injured on the insured’s
premises at some time during the policy period. The insured reports
the details of the occurrence to the insurer as soon as practicable
and before the end of the policy period, but the injured person has not
yet made a claim against the insured by the end of the policy period.
Because of the basic extended reporting period, any resulting claim
will be covered under the expired policy (subject to policy limits and
conditions) if the claim is made before the end of the five-year period.
The basic tail also contains a statement that the basic extended
reporting period is limited to sixty days for “all other claims.”
Presumably, “all other claims” refers to any injury or offense that is
not reported to the insurer within the initial sixty days after the end of
the policy period. Say, for example, that the same occurrence
described above happened without the insured’s knowledge, and so
the insured did not notify the insurer. The unknown and unreported
occurrence will be automatically covered under the expired policy only
if a claim is first made within sixty days after the end of the policy
period. If the insured wants a discovery period of any longer duration,
the supplemental tail will need to be purchased.
The basic tail does not apply to claims covered under subsequent
insurance purchased by the named insured. To illustrate, say that the
insured obtains a new claims-made policy with the same retroactive
date as the previous policy, which had been cancelled. A claim is first
made during the policy period of the new policy for an accident that
occurred during the previous policy period and was reported to the
insurer before the end of that period. Although the claim would
otherwise qualify for coverage under the five-year tail, the existenceof the subsequent insurance for the accident voids any coverage
under the previous policy. The policy states that this is true even if the
subsequent policy’s aggregate limits have been exhausted by
previous claims.
Another important feature of the basic tail is that it is subject to
aggregate policy limits. If those limits have been reduced by previous
claims, those reduced limits will be applicable to any claim made
within the basic tail period.
Although the basic tail provides potentially valuable coverage, it
does not meet all insureds’ needs in all cases. The insured needs only
to consider the possibility that a reported occurrence might not result
in a claim until five years and one day after policy expiration, or an
unknown and unreported occurrence might result in a claim sixty-one
days after policy expiration. In either case, the basic tail will provide
no coverage whatsoever. Unless the insured’s current policy is a
claims-made policy with a retroactive date going back to the
retroactive date of the expired policy, there will be the possibility of
uninsured claims unless the insured purchases the supplemental tail,
which provides for an extended reporting period of unlimited duration.
Supplemental Tail
While the basic tail is provided automatically and for no additional
premium, the supplemental tail is provided by endorsement, for an
additional premium, and only if requested by the insured in writing
within sixty days after the end of the policy period. If the insured does
not exercise its option within sixty days after the end of the policy
period, the insurer will have no obligation to sell the insured the
supplemental tail endorsement. Thus, any insured that might need the
supplemental tail should make a final determination before the sixty-
day period expires. To summarize what was said earlier, the need for
the supplemental tail exists when (1) the insured switches fromclaims-made to occurrence coverage; (2) the insured no longer
carries liability insurance; or (3) the previous policy is renewed or
replaced with claims-made coverage subject to an advanced
retroactive date.
Supplemental tail coverage is activated by adding endorsement
CG 27 10, Supplemental Extended Reporting Period Endorsement, to
the expired or cancelled policy. (Until revised in 1997, this
endorsement was designated CG 27 01.) A notable feature of the
endorsement is that it automatically provides separate aggregate
limits equaling the policy’s original aggregate limits. (The basic tail is
subject to the regular policy aggregate limits, even if reduced by
previous claims.) Both the endorsement and its separate limits apply
only to claims first received and recorded during the supplemental
extended reporting period. The supplemental extended reporting
period begins when the basic tail ends. Once it takes effect, the
supplemental extended reporting period continues forever.
The extended reporting periods provision allows the insurer to
determine the premium for the supplemental tail endorsement in
accordance with the insurer’s rules and rates. The insurer may take
into account:
a.    The exposure insured;
b.    Previous types and amounts of insurance;
c.    Limits of insurance available under this Coverage Part for
future payment of damages; and
d.    Other related factors.
However, the premium for the endorsement may not exceed 200
percent of the annual premium for the coverage part to which the
endorsement would be attached. (The coverage part is thecombination of CGL coverage forms and allied endorsements,
whether they constitute a monoline policy or merely part of a
commercial package policy.) The premium for the extended reporting
period endorsement is fully earned upon the endorsement’s effective
date, and the endorsement cannot be cancelled if the premium is paid
promptly when due.
Other Insurance
The supplemental extended reporting period endorsement amends
the regular other insurance provisions of the policy so that the
coverage of the endorsement is excess over any other valid and
collectible insurance available to the insured, whether primary,
excess, contingent or on any other basis, “whose policy period begins
or continues after the Supplemental Extended Reporting Period
begins.”
To illustrate, say that an insured’s claims-made policy is cancelled
and the insured, unable to find replacement coverage within sixty
days after cancellation, purchases the supplemental tail to protect
against claims for earlier occurrences. Some time later the insured
succeeds in obtaining claims-made coverage with a retroactive date
that encompasses the earlier policy period. After the new policy
takes effect, a claim is made against the insured for injury that
occurred during the previous policy period. The claim is covered
under both the supplemental tail endorsement and the new claims-
made policy. Because of the other insurance provision under
discussion, the new policy will be primary insurance and the
supplemental tail coverage will be excess. Recall that if a claim is
covered under the insured’s later policy and the basic tail, the insured
cannot collect anything—not even excess cover—under the basic tail
coverage.
Considerations in Issuing Claims-Made
PoliciesNow that the claims-made trigger provisions, including the
retroactive date and extended reporting periods, have been
described, it is possible to consider the various choices that can be
made in arranging claims-made coverage, as well as the
consequences of those choices.
For every claims-made policy issued, the insurance company and
the insured must negotiate a retroactive date, subject to the ISO rule
imposing limitations on when the insurer can advance the retroactive
date. There are three possible outcomes:
•    The retroactive date may be the same as the policy’s
inception date;
•    The retroactive date may be some date earlier than the
policy’s inception date; or
•    No retroactive date may be imposed.
When the retroactive date indicated is the same as the policy’s
inception date, Coverage A under that policy will not cover injury or
damage that occurred before the policy period. If a claim made
during the policy period is to be covered, the bodily injury or property
damage from which the claim arose must also have occurred during
the policy period. Similarly, Coverage B (when the 1990 or later form
is used) will not cover personal and advertising injury caused by an
offense committed before the policy period has begun.
Setting the retroactive date as the policy inception date should be
acceptable to most insureds if they had been insured exclusively
under occurrence liability policies prior to the inception of the claims-
made policy. Prior occurrences, in that case, are potentially within the
coverage of the occurrence policy or policies in effect at the time the
injury or damage occurred.If, however, the insured had been previously insured under the
ISO claims-made form, a retroactive date concurrent with the
inception date of the new policy will leave a coverage gap. The new
claims-made policy will not cover any claims, even if made during the
new policy period, for bodily injury or property damage occurring
before that policy’s inception date. Nor will Coverage B (1990 and
later versions) insure any personal and advertising injury caused by
an offense committed before the new policy’s inception date. The
insured’s only automatic coverage for such claims will come by way
of the basic tail in the expired policy. Thus, if the insured is unable to
obtain a retroactive date that goes back to the inception of the
insured’s first claims-made policy, the insured should purchase the
supplemental tail endorsement under the expiring claims-made policy,
unless it wishes to self-insure the exposure that lies beyond the basic
tail coverage.
Likewise, the insurer too should consider all the consequences of
advancing a retroactive date. If the new policy is a renewal of a
claims-made policy issued by the same insurer, the insured will likely
request a supplemental extended reporting period endorsement from
the insurer. The insurer will be obliged to issue the endorsement,
which will, in effect, turn the last claims-made policy into an
occurrence liability policy, recreating the uncertainty about future
claims that led ISO to introduce claims-made insurance in the first
place.
Moreover, the rate for the new claims-made policy will be less
than what it would have been had the insurer extended the same
retroactive date that applied to the expiring policy. This is because
claims-made rates are modified by factors that increase with the
number of years (up to five) the insured has been in the claims-made
program. The number of years in the claims-made program is
measured from the applicable retroactive date. So, when the insurer
moves the retroactive date up to the inception date of a renewal, it
starts over with the first-year claims-made multiplier and receivesless premium than if it could apply the higher claims-made modifier
that would otherwise apply. (Of course, the insurer also avoids claims
for prior occurrences under the new policy.)
When an insurer is issuing a claims-made policy to an insured for
the first time—that is, the policy is not a renewal—the insurer should
still consider the possibility of using a retroactive date earlier than the
new policy’s inception date. Say, for example, the insured had four
years of claims-made coverage before making application to the new
insurer. If the new insurer proposes a retroactive date concurrent with
the new policy’s inception date, it will be able to quote a first-year
claims-made premium as well as avoid liability for earlier
occurrences. However, the insured will for all practical purposes be
forced to purchase an extended reporting period endorsement from
the previous insurer. If the premium for that endorsement plus the
premium for the new policy is considerably more than the premium for
renewing the existing policy, the insured may decide not to switch
insurers after all.
If the retroactive date on the new policy is set as the inception
date of the insured’s first claims-made policy, the retroactive date
should not create any coverage gaps or require the insured to buy
extended reporting period coverage (assuming the new policy has
coverage terms as broad as those of the prior policy). In some cases
the insurer may be willing to set a retroactive date earlier than the
inception date of the new policy but not all the way back to the
inception of the insured’s first claims-made policy. That could be the
case if the insurer felt that reported or unreported occurrences from
that prior period could pose an unacceptable risk. Here again,
because the new retroactive date does not extend all the way back to
the retroactive date of the first claims-made policy, the insured will
need to buy the supplemental tail endorsement under the expiring
policy in order to avoid a coverage gap.The third possibility for retroactive dates—not imposing any
retroactive date whatsoever—has the effect of providing coverage for
claims first made during the current policy period, regardless of when
the injury or damage occurred. Although attractive to insureds, this
option sees limited use, particularly for insureds whose products or
work have been on the market for some time or whose products or
work have a potential for causing latent injury.
If, however, the insured had continuous occurrence type coverage
in effect for all years leading up to the claims-made policy being
issued, the insurer may be amenable to imposing no retroactive date,
in view of the fact that earlier occurrences would be covered on a
primary basis under the earlier occurrence-type policies and only on
an excess basis under the claims-made policy in effect at the time
claim was made. (The other insurance provision will be described in
more detail in Chapter 5.) The adequacy of the limits of insurance
under the earlier policies and the insured’s claim history are important
factors in the underwriter’s decision.
Exclusion of Specific Accidents, Etc.
As said earlier, when a claims-made policy is being issued, injury
and damage that occurred before the inception of the new policy can
be excluded simply by imposing a retroactive date that is concurrent
with the inception date of the new policy. When that is done, all injury
or damage that occurred before the new inception date will be
excluded, even if claim is first made during the new policy period. The
preceding discussion also pointed out why such a retroactive date is
not desirable for the insured and in some cases may be undesirable
for the insurer. Moreover, there may be situations when ISO rules do
not permit the insurer to advance the retroactive date, as discussed
earlier.As an alternative to excluding all prior occurrences through the
retroactive date, an ISO endorsement (CG 27 02) is available for
excluding specific accidents. An insurer might use this endorsement if
it were willing to extend an earlier retroactive date but did not want to
be liable for certain injuries known to have occurred before policy
inception. The endorsement allows the insurer to exclude the known
accident(s) without having to impose a retroactive date that excludes
all prior occurrences, known or unknown.
The endorsement, which is entitled Exclusion of Specific
Accidents, Products, Work or Locations, can also be used, as its
name implies, to exclude specific products, work, or locations. As is
the case with specific accidents, the insurer must describe the
specific products, work, or locations in the endorsement. When that is
done, coverage for the products, work, or locations specified is
excluded whether the injury or damage occurred before or after
inception of the new policy. Thus, apart from excluding specific
accidents known to have happened, the exclusion might be used in
the following situations:
•    The insured has sold, and continues to sell, a certain product
that the insurer does not want to insure for any price. Apart
from the particular product, the insurer is willing to insure the
rest of the insured’s products liability exposure, including
claims made during the new policy period for prior accidents
involving products other than those for which the insurer
wishes to avoid liability. To accomplish these aims, the insurer
could provide an earlier retroactive date but attach the
exclusionary endorsement with a description of the particular
product to be excluded.
•    The insured wishes to self-insure certain products or work
without excluding the products-completed operations hazard
entirely. The insured could ask the insurance company to
exclude the particular products or work in consideration of a
reduced premium.•    The insurer does not want to assume liability for a particular
location of the insured’s; or, the insured wants to self-insure
the liability exposure arising from a particular location. In either
case, excluding the location allows the insurer to provide
coverage for the insured’s other CGL exposures.
Note that the exclusion must be attached to all subsequent claims-
made policies if the insurer wants the effect of the endorsement to
continue. To illustrate, say that an insurer is renewing a claims-made
policy that excluded a particular accident. If the accident has not
resulted in a claim against the insured by renewal time and the insurer
is still unwilling to insure the potential claim, the insurer should exclude
the accident from the renewal policy as well.
When the exclusion of specific accidents, products, work, or
locations is first added to a renewal policy, the insurer must also
amend the expiring policy with another endorsement, CG 27 03,
entitled Amendment of Section V—Extended Reporting Periods for
Specific Accidents, Products, Work or Locations. This endorsement
extends the expiring policy’s basic tail coverage to apply to the
excluded accidents, products, work, or locations. It also gives the
insured the option to purchase supplemental tail coverage with
respect to those items. Supplemental extended reporting period
endorsement CG 27 11 is available for providing that coverage under
the expiring policy if the insured elects it. Like the supplemental tail
endorsement CG 27 10, endorsement CG 27 11 provides separate
aggregate limits equal to the aggregate limits in the policy to which
the endorsement is attached. (Until revised in 1997, this endorsement
was designated CG 27 04.)
Special Products Problem
When a particular accident has been excluded under a renewal
policy as described above, endorsement CG 27 11 provides themeans of extending the renewal policy to cover any claims later
arising out of that accident. Such is not necessarily the case with
products, however. For example, say that the named insured
manufactures a batch of 100,000 jars of a contaminated foodstuff,
and the jars are widely distributed before the defect is discovered.
Upon policy renewal the insurer excludes the entire batch, via
endorsement CG 27 02, in the renewal policy.
Besides adding the exclusion to the renewal policy, the insurer will
be obliged to amend the expiring policy with endorsement CG 27 03.
That will extend the basic tail coverage of the expiring policy to the
excluded batch and allow the insured to purchase supplemental tail
coverage for the excluded batch. If the insured purchases the
supplemental tail, the expired policy will cover, for a period of
unlimited duration, any claim first made after the end of the policy
period, but only if the claim arises out of an injury that occurred
before the expiration date. There is still the possibility, even if the
insured has recalled the defective batch, that someone will consume
the contaminated product and sustain injury after the renewal policy
has gone into effect. Because the injury occurred after the inception
of the renewal policy, a resulting claim will be excluded by both the
renewal policy and the expired policy, despite the existence of
supplemental tail coverage under the expired policy. Note that a
similar problem could arise with respect to excluded work or
locations.
Consequently, insureds should, if possible, avoid imposition of the
exclusion of specified products, work, or locations, unless the insured
consciously chooses to self-insure the exposure to loss from injury
occurring after the effective date of the exclusion. If the insured
wishes to maintain insurance for the exposure despite the insurer’s
intention to exclude the product, work, or location, the insured must
either (1) negotiate with the insurer to have the insurer refrain from
adding the exclusion or (2) find another insurer that is willing to insure
the exposure.If the replacement policy is claims-made, it obviously must not
contain the exclusion that the previous insurer wanted to use. Beyond
that is the matter of retroactive date. If the new policy’s retroactive
date is later than the expiring policy’s, the insured will need to buy
supplemental tail coverage under the expiring policy if it wishes to
insure, without time limit, its exposure to claims first made after
termination of the expiring policy that result from injuries occurring
before the termination. In the unlikely event that the retroactive date
on the new policy is the same as that on the expiring policy,
supplemental tail coverage will be unnecessary, assuming the new
insurer has not excluded any prior accidents, products, work, or
locations.
If the new policy is on an occurrence basis, it will cover claims,
whenever they are first made, that result from injury that occurs
during its policy period. However, the insured will need to buy
supplemental tail coverage under the expiring policy if the insured
wants an extended reporting period of unlimited duration for claims
based on injuries that occurred before the inception date of the new
occurrence policy.Chapter 5
General Provisions
This chapter describes three sections of the CGL forms that apply
generally to all coverages under the forms. These sections are as
follows:
Section II — Who Is an Insured
Section III — Limits of Insurance
Section IV — Commercial General Liability Conditions
Who Is an Insured
Section II of the CGL coverage forms entitled “Who Is an
Insured,” was modified in 1993, 1996, 2001, and 2004; the current
version of the CGL forms (12 07) contains the same wording as the
2004 edition. The commentary in this section does the following:
1.    Presents the 2001 and 2004/2007 “Who Is an Insured”
provisions.
2.    Compares the 1986 and later provisions to the
corresponding provisions of the 1973 comprehensive
general liability policy and the broad form general liability
endorsement (hereinafter referred to as the “old”
provisions).3.    Describes the modifications to the “Who Is an Insured”
where applicable.
“Who Is an Insured” consists of four parts in the 2001 edition of
the CGL policy; part 3 was omitted from the 2004 edition. Each part
is discussed in turn below.
Part 1—“Y ou” and Other Designated Persons
Part 1 of Who Is an Insured reads as follows:
1.    If you are designated in the Declarations as:
a.    An individual, you and your spouse are insureds, but
only with respect to the conduct of a business of which
you are the sole owner.
b.    A partnership or joint venture, you are an insured. Your
members, your partners, and their spouses are also
insureds, but only with respect to the conduct of your
business.
c.    A limited liability company, you are an insured. Your
members also are insureds, but only with respect to
the conduct of your business. Your managers are
insureds, but only respect to their duties as your
managers.
d.    An organization other than a partnership, joint venture
or limited liability company, you are an insured. Your
“executive officers” and directors are insureds, but only
with respect to their duties as your officers or
directors. Your stockholders are also insureds, but only
with respect to their liability as stockholders.e.    A trust, you are an insured. Your trustees are also
insureds, but only with respect to their duties as
trustees.
It is important to understand that if an individual has many
business interests and desires protection for his or her individual
business liability, being designated as an individual in the liability
policy will not fulfill that purpose. The reason is that the individual’s
coverage is strictly limited to one or more businesses in which the
individual is the sole owner or proprietor. Some insurers will cover
individuals for their business liability unrelated to sole proprietorships,
but it takes a different designation than simply designating that the
policy is issued to an individual. One such approach is to state the
person’s name on the list of named insureds followed by the
descriptive, individually; as an example: John Doe, Individually.
A partnership is a business consisting of two or more individuals
(partners) who share in losses and profits and have unlimited liability.
The formation of a partnership does not require any state filings,
unlike a limited liability company or corporation. A joint venture is a
partnership for a limited purpose. Once that purpose has been met,
the joint venture commonly is dissolved. A limited partnership is an
entity comprised of at least one general partner and one or more
limited partners. The general partner, which may consist of one or
more individuals or corporations, actually manages the entity. The
general partner also commonly has the same rights and unlimited
liability that confront the partners of a partnership.
In 1996, Who Is an Insured was modified to include various
references to limited liability companies, which are an increasingly
common alternative to individual proprietorships, partnerships, joint
ventures, and corporations. Although this phenomenon was in use in
other parts of the world as early as the 1930s, it was first introduced
to the U.S. business community in 1977.Members of a limited liability company are typically the owners,
whereas the managers are those elected by the members to manage
the entity. The potential liability for the wrongful conduct of the LLC
members, in a large part, is analogous to the liability faced by officers
and directors of a corporation.
If the named insured is a limited liability company, the company is
an insured. The members (essentially, owners) of the company are
also insureds, but only with respect to the conduct of the company’s
business. The company’s managers are also insureds, but only with
respect to their duties as the company’s managers.
Trustees were able to be added to the pre-2001 CGL forms as
additional insureds by endorsement. With the introduction of the 2001
CGL forms, trustees of trusts that are named insureds are included
as insureds, thus eliminating the need for the additional insured
endorsement.
Apart from the additions to limited liability companies and trusts,
the above provisions are virtually identical in effect to the parallel
portions of the old provisions. An improvement over the old coverage
for spouses is the current statement that the spouses of members of
a joint venture are insured persons, provided the named insured is a
joint venture. Under the old language, spouses are insured persons
only if the named insured is a sole proprietor or partnership.
Since at least 1941 and until the 1973 general liability provisions
were replaced, stockholders have been considered as insureds but
only while acting within the scope of their duties as such. However,
the italicized wording was replaced in the 1986 and later CGL forms
with a provision that reads: “your stockholders are also insureds, but
only with respect to their liability as stockholders.”One reason for the amendment might have been cases such as
Turner & Newall v. American Mutual Liability Insurance Company,
1985 WL 8056 (DDC 1985 applying Pa. law)., in which an insurer
was obligated to defend and provide coverage to an English
corporation that held stock, through a wholly owned Canadian
subsidiary corporation, in an American corporation named as an
insured under liability policies. The U.S. District Court for the District
of Columbia ruled that the English corporation was covered under the
liability policies as a stockholder of the named insured “while acting
within the scope of his duties as such” because, in part, of the
ambiguity conveyed by the phrase in quotes. As a result, the insurer
of the liability policies written for the American corporation was
required to pay the English corporation the costs of defending
asbestos-related bodily injury suits arising out of the conduct of both
the English corporation and the American corporation.
Part 2—Volunteer Workers and Employees
The second part of Who Is an Insured (2001 and 2004/2007
versions) reads as follows:
2.    Each of the following is also an insured:
a.    Your “volunteer workers” only while performing duties
related to the conduct of your business, or your
“employees”, other than either your “executive officers”
(if you are an organization other than a partnership,
joint venture or limited liability company) or your
managers (if you are a limited liability company), but
only for acts within the scope of their employment by
you or while performing duties related to the conduct of
your business. However, none of these “employees” or
“volunteer workers” are insureds for:
(1)    “Bodily injury” or “personal and advertising injury”:(a)    To you, to your partners or members (if you
are a partnership or joint venture), to your
members (if you are a limited liability
company), a co-“employee” while in the
course of his or her employment or
performing duties related to the conduct of
your business, or to your other “volunteer
workers” while performing duties related to
the conduct of your business;
(b)    To the spouse, child, parent, brother or
sister of that co-“employee” as a
consequence of Paragraph (1)(a) above;
(c)    For which there is any obligation to share
damages with or repay someone else who
must pay damages because of the injury
described in Paragraphs (1)(a) or (b) above;
or
(d)    Arising out of his or her providing or failing
to provide professional health care services.
(2)    “Property damage” to property:
(a)    Owned, occupied or used by,
(b)    Rented to, in the care, custody or control
of, or over which physical control is being
exercised for any purpose by
you, any of your “employees,” “volunteer
workers,” any partner or member (if you are
a partnership or joint venture), or any
member (if you are a limited liability
company).b.    Any person (other than your “employee” or “volunteer
worker”), or any organization while acting as your real
estate manager.
c.    Any person or organization having proper temporary
custody of your property if you die, but only:
(1)    With respect to liability arising out of the
maintenance or use of that property; and
(2)    Until your legal representative has been
appointed.
d.    Your legal representative if you die, but only with
respect to duties as such. That representative will have
all your rights and duties under this Coverage Part.
Volunteers as Insureds
The portions of Section 2.a. regarding volunteer workers have no
counterparts in earlier editions of the CGL forms. Newly added in the
2001 edition as an automatic insured is a volunteer worker, a term
defined to mean “a person who is not your ‘employee’, and who
donates his or her work and acts at the direction of and within the
scope of duties determined by you, and is not paid a fee, salary or
other compensation by you or anyone else for their work performed
for you.”
Definitions
Reference to the quoted term “employee” was an addition to CGL
forms in 1993 in order to better facilitate coverage for employee
leasing exposures that have grown immensely over recent years. Toclarify matters, the term “employee” also needed to be defined. The
definition section now defines employee to mean:
“Employee” includes a “leased worker.” “Employee” does not
include a “temporary worker”.
The fact that the word “includes” is used in the above definition
instead of “means” avoids limiting the definition of employee solely to
a leased worker. The term employee, therefore, can also be taken to
mean any employed person, other than an excluded person such as a
temporary worker.
And to make it clear that a temporary worker is not given the
same status and protection as other employees, including leased
workers, the definitions section contains two additional defined terms
that were added with the 1993 amendments:
“Leased worker” means a person leased to you by a labor
leasing firm under an agreement between you and the labor
leasing firm, to perform duties related to the conduct of your
business. “Leased worker” does not include a “temporary
worker”.
“Temporary worker” means a person who is furnished to you to
substitute for a permanent “employee” on leave to meet
seasonal or short-term workload conditions.
Incidentally, the definition of temporary worker is identical to that
definition appearing in the labor contractor endorsement for use with
the standard workers compensation policy as issued to the entity that
desires to obtain the services of a labor contractor (lessor). Even
though defined, this term presents many problems leading to litigation
over the meaning of the words “furnished to.” The reason for these
arguments is that if a worker is considered not to be a temporary
one, that worker cannot sue the named insured (employer) and
collect damages for any injuries. The defined term “leased worker”,on the other hand, is referred to, but undefined, under the workers
compensation policy.
Another term now defined is “executive officer,” meaning a person
holding any of the officer positions created by your charter,
constitution, by-laws, or any other similar governing document. One
of the primary reasons executive officer is a defined term is to avoid
the argument raised by some employees confronted with a fellow
employee suit (currently also referred to as a co-employee suit) to
maintain that they were acting in the capacity of an executive officer
at the time their negligent conduct injured another employee in order
to overcome the CGL policy’s co-employee exclusion. With this
definition of executive officer within the policy, an alleged
tortfeasor/co-employee will be unlikely to obtain coverage unless he
is in fact an executive officer as defined in the policy.
One can conclude, based on section 2.(a), that those who are
automatically included as insureds under CGL forms are volunteer
workers, employees, and leased workers. Those who are not
insureds under this section are temporary workers and executives,
the latter because they are automatically included as an insured in the
first section of Who Is an Insured.
Co-Employee Exclusion
Paragraph 2.a.(1)(a), as it now reads above, was introduced with
the 1993 edition and is referred to as the co-employee exclusion. It
contains language to make it clear that no employee is an insured for
bodily injury or personal injury to the named insured’s partners or
members if the named insured is a partnership or joint venture.
Although earlier editions applied only to injury to “you or to a co-
employee,” ISO has maintained that the revised language is merely a
clarification.Because most states do not permit co-employee suits, many
underwriters will delete reference to co-employee suits by
endorsement.1 When such an endorsement is issued, it still leaves
intact such exclusions as paragraph 2.a.(1)(a) involving injuries, at the
hands of an employee, upon the named insured’s partners, members
of joint venture, limited liability companies, and sole owners.
It was with the 1990 revision that paragraph 2.a.(1)(b) was
introduced. It broadened the co-employee exclusion to preclude
coverage for suits made by relatives of an employee against a co-
employee. As a result, this wording has the same effect with respect
to relatives’ suits against co-employees as the employee injury
exclusion (exclusion e. of Coverage A) has on relatives’ suits against
the named insured.
Third Party Actions
Paragraph 2.a.(1)(c) was introduced in 1990 to make clear that
coverage is precluded even in such instances as a third party (or third
party over) action (discussed in Chapter 1).
Professional Liability Exclusions
The exclusion of injuries arising out of an employee’s providing or
failing to provide professional health care services [2.a.(1)(d) above]
has no counterpart in the old provisions. Ordinarily, a professional
liability exclusion endorsement is attached to a CGL policy whenever
the insured’s classification—for example, physician or hospital—calls
for it. Such an exclusion differs from section 2.a.(1)(d) above in that
the endorsement excludes professional liability of any insured under
the policy, including the named insured. Section 2.a.(1)(d), in
contrast, excludes professional liability of the insured employee only;
it does not, for example, apply to vicarious liability that the namedinsured might have for the employee’s providing or failing to provide
professional health care services.
Therefore, section 2.a.(1)(d) should not be viewed as a substitute
for the professional liability exclusions that may be attached to a CGL
policy for certain classifications. The intent behind 2.a.(1)(d) seems to
be to exclude coverage for professional liability that might fall upon
incidental medical personnel of the insured organization, particularly
an organization that does not otherwise provide medical services.
So, for example, a nurse employed by a manufacturer to
administer first aid to other employees would not be covered for
liability arising out of her providing of health care services. As long as
the policy is not amended with a professional liability exclusion that
applies to the named insured, the named insured would be covered
for liability arising out of the employed professional’s providing of
health care services, assuming no other exclusion applied, such as (in
the case of an employee’s claim) those relating to injury to employees
of the named insured and to workers compensation obligations. If, for
example, an employed nurse injured a visitor to the premises in
administering first aid to the visitor, the policy would not cover a claim
against the nurse but presumably would cover a claim against the
employer.
Section 2.a.(1)(d) may be intended, at least partially, as a
counterpart to an exclusion under the incidental malpractice liability
provisions of the broad form CGL endorsement that commonly was
attached to the 1973 CGL policy. The old exclusion applied to any
insured engaged in the business or occupation of providing any of a
variety of medical services listed under the incidental malpractice
coverage. Since an employed medical professional can be viewed as
an insured engaged in the occupation of providing medical services,
he or she would not have been covered under the old broad form
endorsement either. However, the old exclusion applied to any insuredin that business or occupation, whereas section 2.a.(1)(d) applies
only to employees.
Property Damage Exclusion
Exclusion j of the 1986 CGL coverage forms excluded (among
other things) damage to “personal property in your care, custody or
control.” In the 1990 CGL changes, ISO changed this part of the
exclusion j. to apply to “personal property in the care, custody or
control of the insured.” After making this change, ISO became
concerned that the change would be interpreted to mean that the
CGL forms would cover damage to employees’ property in the care,
custody or control of the named insured.
To preclude this interpretation, the 1993 modifications added
language to the “Who Is an Insured” property damage exclusion
making it clear that no employee is an insured for damage to property
in the care, custody, or control of the named insured or over which
the insured is exercising physical control for any reason. [See section
2.a.(2).] In ISO’s opinion, this change does not involve any change in
coverage.
Real Estate Managers, Custodians, and Legal
Representatives
Subpart 2.b., respecting real estate managers, is virtually identical
to a similar clause under the 1973 general liability coverage part. As
a matter of history, this provision, worded a little differently, was first
added to general liability policy provisions in 1955. Today, more so
than ever, the question of who a real estate manager can encompass
is highly litigated because it is a term that is not defined in CGL
forms. For example, a court-appointed receiver who managed the
real property of creditors was held to be a real estate manager in
one case, as was a mortgagee in another case. Subparts 2.c. and2.d. express the same extent of insured status for custodians and
legal representatives following the named insured’s death as is
provided under the assignment provision in the old general liability
policy jacket.
Part 3—Operators of Mobile Equipment
As is noted elsewhere in this book, one of the more significant
2004 revisions has to do with the elimination of coverage for mobile
equipment subject to a compulsory or financial responsibility law or
other motor vehicle insurance law in the state where the equipment is
licensed or principally garaged. Now considered as autos, these land
vehicles are subject to coverage by business auto, truckers, or motor
carrier coverage forms.
In light of this revision, coverage will no longer apply to operators
of mobile equipment registered under any of the applicable laws. In
fact, this part of the Who Is an Insured provision was deleted with the
2004 revisions. However, not all insurers will necessarily use the 2004
or the 2007 ISO edition, particularly those insurers who continue to
maintain such risks on a CGL policy basis, rather than a commercial
auto form. For this reason, the discussion of this part remains intact
so as to continue giving readers the valuable background information
about the rationale for this provision.
The third part of Who Is an Insured (2001 version only) reads as
follows:
3.    With respect to “mobile equipment” registered in your name
under any motor vehicle registration law, any person is an
insured while driving such equipment along a public highway
with your permission. Any other person or organization
responsible for the conduct of such person is also an insured,
but only with respect to liability arising out of the operation of
the equipment, and only if no other insurance of any kind isavailable to that person or organization for this liability.
However, no person or organization is an insured with respect
to:
a.    “Bodily injury” to a co-“employee” of the person driving
the equipment; or
b.    “Property damage” to property owned by, rented to, in
the charge of or occupied by you or the employer of
any person who is an insured under this provision.
The above provisions respecting insured status for persons
operating mobile equipment on public roads have essentially the
same effect as similar provisions under the persons insured section of
the 1973 general liability form.
An apparent, though not real, difference between the two versions
is that the above version applies only to mobile equipment registered
in the name of the named insured, while the 1973 version requires
that the mobile equipment be registered in the name of the named
insured only when the operator is someone other than an employee
of the named insured. That is, the 1973 general liability form provided
insured status to employees while operating registered equipment on
public highways, regardless of whether the equipment was registered
in the name of the named insured or another entity. The above
provision, viewed by itself, seems to say that registration in the name
of the named insured is required in all cases.
However, it must be remembered that, under the current CGL
forms, employees are insured persons, apart from this provision, by
virtue of part 2.a. of Who Is an Insured, discussed earlier. Therefore,
as long as use of mobile equipment is not excluded by some other
provision in the policy, employees are covered while driving it on
public highways within the scope of their employment by the named
insured—regardless of whether it is registered in the name of thenamed insured or another entity, and, presumably, regardless of
whether it is registered. The same is true of any other person or
organization that qualifies as an insured apart from the mobile
equipment provision—say, the spouse of the named insured.
The problem is that no one knows for sure whether mobile
equipment being used on a public highway at the time of an accident
is registered in the named insured’s name under any motor vehicle
registration law, or even needs to be registered. Some owners of
mobile equipment required to be registered under a motor vehicle
registration law may intentionally forgo such a requirement under the
belief that such equipment will never be used on public roads. At the
other extreme are owners of mobile equipment who are ignorant of
the law concerning registration of mobile equipment. There are also
circumstances when certain mobile equipment does not have to be
registered.
For any person other than those who otherwise qualify as
insureds, the requirement that the equipment must be registered in
the name of the named insured is applicable. For example, an
independent contractor doing work for the named insured could not
qualify as an insured under the named insured’s policy while driving
mobile equipment registered in his own name. If, instead, the
contractor drove mobile equipment registered in the name of the
named insured, the contractor would be covered, provided the
independent contractor met all other conditions of coverage.
Also covered is any other person or organization responsible for
the conduct of persons covered for the operation of the equipment,
provided the person or organization has no other available insurance
for the accident.
The above provision excludes bodily injury to a co-employee of the
person driving the equipment. In the 1973 form, a similar exclusionapplies to bodily injury to any fellow employee of such person injured
in the course of his or her employment.
Another exclusion applicable to the provision under discussion
eliminates coverage for property damage to “property owned by,
rented to, in the charge of or occupied by you or the other employer
of any person who is an insured under this provision.” The 1973 form
has a similar exclusion, to the same effect.
Part 4—Newly Acquired Organizations
Part 4 of Who Is an Insured in the 2001 version (part 3 in the
2004 and 2007 version) reads as follows:
4.    Any organization you newly acquire or form, other than a
partnership, joint venture or limited liability company, and over
which you maintain ownership or majority interest, will qualify
as a Named Insured if there is no other similar insurance
available to that organization. However:
a.    Coverage under this provision is afforded only until the
90th day after you acquire or form the organization or
the end of the policy period, whichever is earlier;
b.    Coverage A does not apply to “bodily injury” or
“property damage” that occurred before you acquired
or formed the organization; and
c.    Coverage B does not apply to “personal and
advertising injury” arising out of an offense committed
before you acquired or formed the organization.
This category provides essentially the same coverage as the
provision titled “automatic coverage—newly acquired organizations” inthe broad form comprehensive general liability endorsement.
However, in the current forms, reference to limited liability companies
has been added, the new term “personal and advertising injury” is
substituted for “personal injury” or “advertising injury,” and a number
of qualifications have been added, which are probably best viewed as
clarifications of the coverage previously intended. Among these
qualifications are a statement that the coverage does not apply to
newly acquired or formed partnerships, joint ventures, or limited
liability companies; that the coverage expires at the end of the policy
period if that is less than ninety days after the acquisition or formation
date; and that Coverages A and B do not apply to incidents that took
place prior to the acquisition or formation of the new organization.
Apart from these qualifications, there appears to be an actual
difference between the old and current provisions in the matter of
other insurance that the organization might have. The current forms
refer to “other similar insurance available to that organization.” The
old language is more stringent, referring to any other insurance under
which the new organization is an insured or under which it “would be
an insured…but for exhaustion of its limits of liability.”
Undeclared Partnerships and Joint Ventures
The final clause under Who Is an Insured states that:
No person or organization is an insured with respect to the
conduct of any current or past partnership or joint venture or
limited liability company that is not shown as a Named Insured in
the Declarations.
This clause differs from a similar one under the 1973 general
liability form in that it includes reference to a limited liability company,
and it applies to “any current or past partnership or joint venture”
(emphasis added), whereas the old wording applies only to “any
partnership or joint venture of which the insured is a partner ormember.” Thus, while the old wording might be interpreted not to
exclude partnerships or joint ventures of which the insured was
previously, but not at the time of claim, a partner or member, the new
language is quite clear in excluding undeclared partnerships or joint
ventures regardless of when they existed.
The current wording does not address a problem in interpretation
of the earlier joint venture exclusion, which arose in a 1982 case
decided by the Minnesota Supreme Court. That court held that the
old exclusion did not relieve an insurer of the duty to defend its
insured against an allegation of bodily injury arising out of the
operation of an undeclared “joint venture or joint enterprise” of which
the insured was a member. The decision rested on the fact that the
exclusion does not specifically refer to joint enterprises. The case is
Grain Dealers Mutual Ins. Co. v. Cady, 318 N.W.2d 247 (Minn.
1982).
The exclusion of partnerships or joint ventures that are not named
in the policy declarations also has been expanded to exclude
unnamed limited liability companies. If coverage is wanted for a
present or past limited liability company, it must be shown as a
named insured in the policy declarations.
The purpose for this provision is to keep the insurer from
encountering any surprises about such business relationships a
named insured might have currently, or has had in the past, that can
raise the demand for coverage in the future. So, if a CGL policy of a
named insured also lists a current or past partnership or joint venture,
the foregoing provision confirms that the entity, as named insured, is
covered along with its partners or joint venturers, as insureds.
Limits of InsuranceSection III of the CGL coverage forms defines the various limits of
insurance and their applicability. This section of the policy differs from
pre-1986 forms in a number of ways, particularly with respect to the
general aggregate limit under the CGL coverage forms. The Limits of
Insurance section is quoted in part below.
1.    The Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations and the
rules below fix the most we will pay regardless of the number
of:
a.    Insureds;
b.    Claims made or “suits” brought; or
c.    Persons or organizations making claims or bringing
“suits”.
2.    The General Aggregate Limit is the most we will pay for the
sum of:
a.    Medical expenses under Coverage C; and
b.    Damages under Coverage A, except damages
because of “bodily injury” and “property damage”
included in the “products-completed operations
hazard”; and
c.    Damages under Coverage B.
3.    The Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit is the
most we will pay under Coverage A for damages because of
“bodily injury” and “property damage” included in the
“products-completed operations hazard”.4.    Subject to Paragraph 2. above, the Personal and Advertising
Injury Limit is the most we will pay under Coverage B for the
sum of all damages because of all “personal injury” and all
“advertising injury” sustained by any one person or
organization.
5.    Subject to Paragraph 2. or 3. above, whichever applies, the
Each Occurrence Limit is the most we will pay for the sum of:
a.    Damages under Coverage A; and
b.    Medical expenses under Coverage C
       because of all “bodily injury” and “property damage”
arising out of any one “occurrence”.
6.    Subject to Paragraph 5. above, the Damage To Premises
Rented To You Limit is the most we will pay under Coverage A
for damages because of “property damage” to any one
premises, while rented to you, or in the case of damage by
fire, while rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with
permission of the owner.
7.    Subject to Paragraph 5. above, the Medical Expense Limit is
the most we will pay under Coverage C for all medical
expenses because of “bodily injury” sustained by any one
person.
The wording of clause 6. above was changed in 1998 to show
that the term is now the “damage to premises rented to you” limit
instead of the “fire damage” limit. This complements the coverage
afforded the insured as discussed previously in connection with
exclusion j under Coverage A. Note that this clause pertains to
damage to premises; fire damage is no longer the only covered
cause of loss to property rented to the named insured.Aggregate Limits
The most important difference between the current and the 1973
limits of liability provisions is that the current forms are subject to a
general aggregate limit that limits the total amount payable during the
policy period for Coverages A, B, and C, except for products-
completed operations claims, which are subject to a separate
aggregate limit. Under the 1973 liability policy, there is an aggregate
limit applicable to bodily injury resulting from products or completed
operations claims, and another aggregate limit applicable to property
damage resulting from 1) risks rated on a remuneration basis or
contractors equipment rated on a receipts basis; 2) operations
performed for the named insured by independent contractors; and 3)
the products and completed operations hazards. However, all other
claims are subject only to a per occurrence, and not an aggregate,
limit.
Consequently, the general aggregate limit can eliminate coverage
under the current forms that would exist under the 1973 policy. To
illustrate, say that the insured has an each occurrence limit of
$500,000 for Coverage A and a general aggregate limit of $1 million.
If during the policy period the insurer pays two Coverage A claims
(neither involving products or completed operations) worth $500,000
each, the policy will provide no more coverage—under any of the
policy’s insuring agreements, including A, B, and C—for subsequent
claims during the policy period, assuming the claims do not involve
products or completed operations. If the coverage were under the
1973 liability policy, the each occurrence limit would still be available
for any further claims during the policy period, assuming the claims
did not fall under products-completed operations or any of the other
categories that are subject to an aggregate limit under the 1973
provisions.
Reduction of the general aggregate limit does not affect the
products-completed operations aggregate limit. Each aggregate limitrepresents a separate amount of insurance. Thus, an insured with a
general aggregate limit of $1 million and a products-completed
operations aggregate limit of $1 million could conceivably collect up to
a total of $2 million under that policy.
Impact on Excess or Umbrella
What the difference described above means, in many cases, is
that the insured’s umbrella or excess liability insurer, if any, is more
likely to become involved in claims that would, under the 1973 policy,
be handled only by the primary insurer. Excess and umbrella liability
insurers that provide insurance over the current CGL forms are likely
to address the increased exposure through appropriate policy
provisions. For example, an excess insurer might require the insured
1) to notify the excess insurer if the primary aggregate limits are
exhausted, and 2) make a reasonable effort to have the exhausted
limits reinstated promptly. Once aware of the exhausted limit, the
excess insurer could consider the eventual need for demanding a
higher premium or perhaps even canceling the policy.
Another concern with respect to excess or umbrella liability
coverage and the claims-made CGL coverage form is the language
ordinarily found in umbrella policies that states when the umbrella will
drop down and pay claims that would have been covered by the
underlying policy except for the reduction or exhaustion of its
aggregate limit(s). The usual stipulation is that the umbrella will pay
such claims only if the reduction of underlying limits was due to
payment of damages for injury that occurred during the policy period
of the umbrella policy.
The problem here is that a primary claims-made CGL policy with
a retroactive date earlier than the policy’s inception date will cover
claims first made during that policy period for injury that occurred
before the policy period of both the current primary policy and the
umbrella policy. Moreover, payment of such claims will reduce orexhaust the aggregate limits of the primary insurance. However,
because the injury did not occur during the policy period of the
umbrella policy, the umbrella insurer will not be required to provide
drop down coverage if the aggregate limit in the primary policy is
reduced or exhausted.
One might think that the best course for an insured with claims-
made primary coverage is to obtain an umbrella policy that is also on
a claims-made basis with a policy period and retroactive date
concurrent with those of the primary policy, as well as extended
reporting period options that parallel those of the underlying policy.
Unfortunately, however, most claims-made excess policies do not
offer tail options as broad as those of the ISO form. And, there may
be other instances in which an umbrella policy is actually narrower in
coverage than the underlying CGL policy. If such is the case, insureds
may be faced with some losses that, although covered by their
underlying insurance, are not covered by their excess form.
Insureds and their advisers should carefully inspect their excess
liability policies for any restrictions along these lines. Agents and
brokers should be especially certain that they explain the
ramifications of the aggregate limit to their clients. Failure to do so
could result in an errors and omissions claim against the agent or
broker.
Applicable Endorsements
The general aggregate limit can be modified by endorsement CG
25 03, to apply separately to each of the named insured’s projects
away from premises owned by or rented to the named insured.
Another endorsement, designated CG 25 04, can be used to make
the general aggregate limit apply separately to each location owned
by or rented to the named insured.Other Limits
In addition to the two aggregate limits, the CGL coverage form
contains an each occurrence limit, a personal and advertising injury
limit, a fire damage limit, and a medical expense limit.
The each occurrence limit is the most that the insurer will pay,
subject to the aggregate limits, for all damages under Coverage A
and all medical expenses under Coverage C arising out of one
occurrence. In other words, expenses paid under Coverage C reduce
the amount payable per occurrence under Coverage A. For example,
if one occurrence gives rise to claims under both Coverage A and
Coverage C, the total recovery for all claims could not exceed the
each occurrence limit. In the 1973 policy, if medical payments
coverage was added to the policy, it was subject to a separate limit
that did not affect the each occurrence limit applicable to bodily injury
and property damage liability.
The personal and advertising injury limit is the most that the
insurer will pay under Coverage B for all damages because of
personal injury or advertising injury sustained by any one person or
organization. The personal and advertising injury coverage of the
broad form general liability endorsement used with the 1973 policy is
subject only to the aggregate limit stated in the endorsement; there is
no per person limit in the standard endorsement. Coverage B of the
current CGL coverage forms is, as said earlier, subject also to the
general aggregate limit.
Thus, it is possible that a Coverage B claim would not be payable,
despite a sufficient per person limit for the claim, in the event that a
number of Coverage A claims had extinguished the general aggregate
limit. This could be true even if there had been no prior Coverage B
claims. Under the broad form liability endorsement, the aggregate
limit applicable to personal and advertising injury coverage is aseparate amount of insurance that cannot be extinguished by prior
bodily injury and property damage liability claims under the same
policy.
It should also be noted that the per person limit applicable to
Coverage B does not appear to apply separately for later offenses
against the same person. If, for example, a person was slandered by
the named insured on one occasion and awarded the full per person
limit in damages, a second instance of slander against the same
person during the policy period would not be covered under that
policy. This would be the case even if the aggregate limit had not
been exhausted.
The medical expense limit is the maximum amount payable per
person under Coverage C. Under the previous forms, medical
payments coverage is ordinarily written with a per person limit and an
aggregate limit but is not applied to reduce the each occurrence limit
governing bodily injury and property damage liability recoveries.
The damage to premises rented to you limit is the most the
insurer will pay for property damage to any one premises while
rented to the named insured or, in the case of fire, while rented to the
named insured or temporarily occupied by the named insured with the
permission of the owner. Any payment under this limit reduces the
general aggregate limit.
Application of Limits
The final portion of the limits of insurance section is as follows:
The limits of this Coverage Part apply separately to each
consecutive annual period, and to any remaining period of less
than 12 months, starting with the beginning of the policy period
shown in the Declarations, unless the policy period is extended
after issuance for an additional period of less than 12 months. Inthat case, the additional period will be deemed part of the last
preceding period for purposes of determining the Limits of
Insurance.
Although this section is largely self-explanatory, an example may
be useful. Say that an insured purchases a policy with a three-year
policy period beginning July 1, 2009, and ending July 1, 2012. The
above provision makes it clear that even if the stated policy limits are
depleted by claims during the first year of the policy period, the full
stated limits will again be applicable beginning on July 1, 2010 (and
again on July 1, 2011).
The provision also addresses situations when an annual policy
period is shortened, as might be the case if a policy with an inception
date of July 1, 2009 was cancelled on January 1, 2010, instead of
expiring on July 1, 2010. Despite the shortening of the last annual
period, the full stated limits would apply to claims covered under that
period.
If, however, a policy is extended for a period of less than one year
—say the insured requests a one-month extension of the policy, after
the regular policy term has expired—the limits will not be renewed for
that additional period. That is, if the policy limits had been reduced by
claims paid during the preceding annual policy period, the reduced
amounts of insurance would apply to the extension period, and not
the full limits stated in the policy.
Conditions
The CGL coverage forms are subject to conditions contained in
Section IV (titled Commercial General Liability Conditions) of the
coverage forms; and are also subject to the ISO common policy
conditions, a separate form that must be attached to everycommercial package or monoline policy issued under current ISO
policywriting procedures.
The Section IV conditions concern: (1) bankruptcy, (2) duties in
the event of occurrence, claim, or suit, (3) legal action against the
insurer, (4) other insurance, (5) premium audit, (6) representations,
(7) separation of insureds, and (8) transfer of rights of recovery
against others to the insurer (subrogation), and (9) nonrenewal. In
addition, the claims-made form contains a tenth condition, concerning
the named insured’s right to obtain claim information from the
insurance company.
The common policy conditions form contains six additional
conditions, concerning (1) cancellation, (2) changes, (3) examination
of the named insured’s books and records, (4) inspections and
surveys, (5) premiums, and (6) transfer of the named insured’s rights
and duties under the policy (assignment).
In most respects, the Section IV conditions correspond closely to
previous general liability conditions. Accordingly, they are only
summarized here. See the appendices to this book for the full text of
the conditions.
The Section IV conditions are as follows:
Bankruptcy
The bankruptcy condition states that neither bankruptcy nor
insolvency of the insured or the insured’s estate will relieve the
insurance company of its obligation under the forms. An equivalent
condition appears within the action against company condition of the
1973 policy jacket.
Duties in the Event of Occurrence, Claim, or SuitThe purpose of this condition is to specify what the insured’s
obligations are as conditions precedent to the insurer’s obligation of
investigating, defending, or paying damages because of a claim or
suit. Due to a 1990 amendment, the named insured must notify the
insurer not only of an occurrence but also of an offense. The latter is
a necessary addition because Coverage B, dealing with personal
injury and advertising injury, applies to offenses, rather than
occurrences. Thus, the duties of the named insured are the same
whether there is an occurrence or an offense.
Although both the occurrence and claims-made forms stipulate
that the named insured must notify the insurer as soon as practicable
of an occurrence or offense that may result in a claim, the claims-
made form, unlike the occurrence form, states that “notice of an
occurrence is not notice of a claim.” So, coverage under the claims-
made form is not triggered by the named insured’s notification that an
occurrence may give rise to a claim. It is only when the injured party
actually makes a claim that coverage is triggered. In the 1993 and
1996 forms, the provision quoted above has been modified to state
that “notice of an occurrence or offense is not notice of a claim”
(emphasis added). This change is appropriate because Coverage B,
which has been on a claims-made basis since the 1990 changes went
into effect, responds to offenses, not occurrences. In the absence of
the 1993/96 change concerning offenses, an insured with the claims-
made form might maintain that, although notice of an occurrence may
not be notice of a claim, such is not the case with notice of an offense
for purposes of Coverage B.
Prior to introduction of the 1986 CGL forms, the distinction
between notifying the insurer of an occurrence and the actual making
of claim concerned some insurance agents, brokers, risk managers,
regulators, and others, in that they felt it would often allow insurers to
avoid liability for claims resulting from occurrences of which the
insurer had been notified but for which claim had not yet been made.
The insurer, once notified of an occurrence, could either cancel thepolicy or, upon renewing the policy, exclude the particular accident by
endorsement, leaving the insured no option for insuring the accident
but to purchase supplemental tail coverage for up to 200 percent of
the policy premium.
In response to this concern, ISO amended the extended reporting
period provisions in the claims-made policy to provide (in the event of
cancellation, nonrenewal, etc.) for an automatic five-year tail for
claims resulting from occurrences that the insured reports to the
insurer no later than sixty days after policy expiration. So, although
notice of an occurrence still does not trigger coverage under the
claims-made policy, any resulting claim first made within five years of
policy expiration will be covered under the policy in effect at the time
of the occurrence, subject, of course, to whatever aggregate limits
remain under that policy at the time of claim. This tail coverage
applies only if there is no later policy purchased by the named insured
that applies to the same loss or would apply but for the exhaustion of
its limits of insurance.
Notice of the occurrence must be given to the insurer “as soon as
practicable.” The notice should include, to the extent possible, how,
when, and where the occurrence took place, the names and
addresses of any injured persons or witnesses, and the nature and
location of any injury or damage arising out of the occurrence.
Moreover, if the insured receives an actual claim, there is now a
requirement that the insured must “immediately record the specifics
of the claim or suit and the date received,” notify the insurer as soon
as practicable, and see to it that the insurer receives written notice of
the claim as soon as practicable.
Legal Action against InsurerThe legal action against us condition of the current CGL forms has
the same purpose as the “action against company” condition of the
1973 policy. Its purpose is to make clear the conditions that must be
met before anyone can bring an action against the insurer, including
an insured. Until the 2001 CGL policy amendment, this condition
stated that a person or organization could sue the insurer to recover
on an agreed settlement or on a final judgment against an insured
obtained after an actual trial. However, because the policy defines
suit to allow damages to be awarded through an arbitration or other
alternative dispute resolution, judgment can be obtained without first
having an actual trial. In light of this fact, the italicized wording above
was eliminated in the 2001 revision of CGL forms.
Other Insurance
The other insurance condition specifies how both damages and
defense costs under Coverages A and B are to be shared when a
loss is covered by two or more insurers. Coverage C, medical
payments, is not affected by other insurance and therefore always
applies on a primary basis irrespective of other insurance.
When there is other valid and collectible insurance, how loss is
apportioned depends on whether the other insurance is primary or
excess. If a CGL policy is primary and the other insurance is excess,
the CGL policy applies first. If, instead, both policies are considered
to be primary, the loss is apportioned by contribution by equal shares
if the other insurance permits this method of sharing. If the other
insurance does not permit contribution by equal shares, the loss is
apportioned by contribution by limits, that is, each insurer’s share is
based on the ratio of its applicable limit of insurance to the total
applicable limits of insurance of all insurers. Both methods of
apportionment are identical to the procedures prescribed by the 1973
general liability policy.Both the occurrence and claims-made CGL coverage forms are
stated to be excess over any other insurance under certain
conditions.
Part 4.(b)(1) of the other insurance provision reads as follows:
This insurance is excess over:
(a)    Any of the other insurance, whether primary, excess,
contingent or on any other basis:
(i)      That is Fire, Extended Coverage, Builder’s Risk,
Installation Risk or similar coverage for “your work”;
(ii)     That is Fire insurance for premises rented to you or
temporarily occupied by you with permission of
the owner;
(iii)    That is insurance purchased by you to cover your
liability as a tenant for “property damage” to premises
rented to you or temporarily occupied by you with
permission of the owner; or
(iv)    If the loss arises out of the maintenance or use of
aircraft, “autos” or watercraft to the extent no subject
to Exclusion g. of Section I—Coverage A—Bodily
Injury and Property Damage Liability.
The italicized portions of the above provisions were added in the
1996 revision. The added language corresponds to the fact that fire
legal liability coverage under the 1993 and 1996 editions applies not
only to premises rented to the named insured, but also to premises
that the named insured temporarily occupies with the owner’s
permission.The insurance under the CGL forms is now excess to insurance
purchased by the named insured to cover liability as a tenant for
property damage to premises rented to or temporarily occupied by
the named insured. So, for example, if the named insured rents a
building for his business and buys a property insurance policy that
gives the named insured coverage for damage to the rented premises
for which he is liable, the named insured’s CGL form will provide
excess insurance to this other policy. That other insurance has to be
valid, collectible, and available to the insured for this excess insurance
clause to apply.
The next part of the excess insurance paragraphs of the other
insurance provision, prior to the 2004 revision, read as follows:
(b)    Any other primary insurance available to you covering
liability for damages arising out of the premises or
operations for which you have been added as an additional
insured by attachment of an endorsement.
This second part was previously contained in two separate
endorsements, introduced with the 1996 CGL revision. The
endorsements were CG 00 55, Amendment of Other Insurance
Condition (CGL Occurrence Version), and CG 00 56 (CGL Claims-
Made Version). The endorsements were withdrawn from use in 1998
when the above wording was added to the CGL forms in 1998.
The effect of this provision is to make a person’s or organization’s
own CGL policy excess over the policy modified by endorsement to
include that person or organization as an additional insured. Thus, the
additional insured is covered on a primary basis on the policy to which
the additional insured endorsement is attached and on an excess
basis on its own policy. This was heralded as a welcomed addition
because a growing number of indemnitees (those who seek to
transfer the financial consequences of their liability to indemnitors)
also requested additional insured status on an indemnitor’s CGLpolicy on a primary basis. Unless an additional insured endorsement
was issued by the insurer that also reflected that the additional
insured is to be covered on a primary basis, a dispute by the insurer
was almost guaranteed. In fact, in the absence of some
acknowledgement that the additional insured was to be protected on
a primary basis, the insurer on whose policy the additional insured
endorsement was issued often would maintain that the additional
insured had its own policy that should also be taken into account in
paying damages. The matter of how insurance coverage was to be
resolved, according to these insurers, was on a pro rata basis, that
is, taking into account the policy of the additional insured and the
policy to which the additional insured endorsement was attached.
However, this pro rata adjustment defeated one of the purposes of
additional insured status, and that was to obtain coverage on a
primary basis under the policy to which the additional insured
endorsement was attached.
As an aside, this primary/excess insurance application is meant to
apply only when the additional insured is added by endorsement.
What is commonly overlooked is that a real estate manager or
property management company is automatically included as an
additional insured on the CGL policy. Technically then, this means that
the CGL policy to which such entity is considered an automatic
additional insured, should not apply as primary over the CGL policy
issued to that real estate management or property management
company as the named insured. What needs to be done, as
explained in Chapter 6, is to add the endorsement titled, “Real Estate
Property Managed CG 22 70.
One of the problems with part (2) of the above provision is that it
applies solely to premises or operations, presumably because ISO
had revised some of its more commonly used additional insured
endorsements to apply solely to on-going operations. When it
introduced the endorsement entitled “Additional Insureds, Owners,
Lessees, or Contractors—C ompleted Operations,” CG 20 37, in2001, a potential problem arose since there was no reference to
products and completed operations. Arguably, the undefined word
“operations”, unless used specifically in the context of the premises
and operations hazard, is broad enough to encompass both ongoing
and completed operations. To avoid such arguments, however, ISO
as part of its 2004 revisions, amended this part of the other insurance
provision to read as follows:
(b)    Any other primary insurance available to you covering
liability for damages arising out of the premises or
operations, or the products and completed operations, for
which you have been added as an insured by attachment of
an endorsement.
As this provision reads, if the named insured (not its officers,
directors, partners, employees, or agents) is added to another policy
as an additional insured for products and completed operations, then
the named insured’s policy will apply as excess for both premises
and/or operations, and products and completed operations.
It has been said that there are at least two potential problems
with this provision.
First, there is no reference to personal and advertising injury
(coverage B), which automatically forms a part of the standard ISO
CGL coverage parts and of many independently filed policies.
Arguably, liability emanating from premises or operations could
encompass various personal and advertising injury offenses. On the
other hand, it could mean that the named insured’s CGL policy will
apply as excess for bodily injury and property damage, but on a
primary basis for personal and advertising injury. The question is, how
many insurers covering a named insured who is covered as an
additional insured by endorsement will take the position that coverage
for personal and advertising injury applies on a primary basis, sincedoing so may come back to haunt them when they are providing
coverage to additional insureds.
Second, this primary/excess application is meant to apply only
when the additional insured is added by endorsement. What is
commonly overlooked, however, is that real estate managers and
property management companies are automatically included as
additional insureds on the CGL policy. In addition, some
independently filed policies incorporating ISO wording include
additional insureds without endorsements.
In light of the foregoing, one of the April 2013 revisions with
regard to the “other insurance” condition is to delete the phrase “by
attachment of an endorsement”. Thus, the impact is that insurance
provided to a named insured will be excess over any other primary
insurance available to the named insured as an additional insured,
whether by endorsement or by other means. (Note that this 2013
revision affects both the occurrence form and the claims-made form,
as well as the supplemental extended reporting period endorsement
(CG 27 10) and the supplemental extended reporting period
endorsement for specific accidents, products, work or locations (CG
27 11).
It is also important to keep in mind that the other insurance
provision will not work with anything other than other ISO primary
policies, or independently filed policies following ISO wording. Some
insurers, for example, will attempt to nullify such attempts to give
additional insureds coverage on a primary basis by stating that their
liability policies apply as excess to anyone, including additional
insureds.
To the extent that umbrella/excess liability policies have built-in
additional insured provisions (rather than having to be modified by
endorsements, which is probably the more common approach), the
above other insurance provision of standard liability policies will notwork. The probable rationale for the provision is so that coverage will
apply on a horizontal, as opposed to a vertical, basis. In other words,
the primary policy limits to which an additional insured endorsement is
attached are to be exhausted first, followed by the additional
insured’s own liability policy. If the limits are still not met, then the
umbrella/excess policy applicable to the additional insured applies
next, followed by the additional insured’s own umbrella/excess policy.
In an attempt to avoid this horizontal settlement, those who desire
to be additional insureds on the policies of others not only will require
coverage on a primary basis, but also on a non-contributing basis.
The problem is that some insurers balk at references to non-
contributing. To reduce the chances of these types of objections, the
term “non-contributing” needs to be defined. One way, for example, is
to say that it means that all liability coverage available to the
additional insured on a primary and umbrella/excess basis is to apply
first, followed by the additional insured’s own primary and
umbrella/excess policies, to the extent of any required excess
coverage. This is another way of explaining the vertical settlement
approach.
Whether this will work or not still is open to question because
some courts are adamant about exhausting limits horizontally no
matter what the policy says. This is why some entities will not accept
a combination of primary and excess coverage limits to satisfy the
limits they require. In other words, should an entity requiring a
minimum of $1 million in limits accept proof of commercial general
liability and/or automobile liability limits of $500,000 per occurrence
with the difference ($500,000 per occurrence or more) being
provided by an umbrella liability policy? Some people would not give
this a second thought and would accept such a combination. A closer
look, however, reveals that this is not as good a deal as when the
primary policies are written for a minimum of $1 million dollars.The other insurance provision also declares that if the named
insured’s insurance is excess, the insurer has no duty to defend if any
other insurer has such a duty. If no other insured defends, the named
insured’s insurer will undertake that role.
In addition to being excess to the types of insurance listed above,
the claims-made CGL form is also excess over other insurance:
that is effective prior to the beginning of the policy period
shown in the Declarations of this insurance and applies to
“bodily injury” or “property damage” on other than a
claims-made basis, if:
(a)    No Retroactive Date is shown in the Declarations of
this insurance; or
(b)    The other insurance has a policy period which
continues after the Retroactive Date shown in the
Declarations of this insurance.
The effect of the above condition is that a claims-made policy
provides excess insurance for any loss that is also covered under a
prior occurrence liability policy. This situation can arise under two
circumstances.
The first such circumstance is when the claims-made policy has
no retroactive date. It stands to reason that there is likely to be some
overlap between an earlier occurrence policy and a claims-made
policy that covers bodily injury or property damage retrospectively
without limit as to time. Should this overlap occur, the claims-made
policy is to be treated as excess insurance.
The second circumstance is when the policy period of an earlier
occurrence policy extends beyond the retroactive date shown in the
claims-made policy. To illustrate, assume that the claims-made policyhas a retroactive date three years prior to its inception date. An
earlier occurrence policy was in force for the same three-year period
but was replaced with the present claims-made policy. A claim for
bodily injury or property damage is first made following inception of
the claims-made policy for injury or damage that occurred after the
retroactive date.
In an event such as this, the occurrence policy applies because
the trigger of coverage is bodily injury or property damage that
occurs during the policy period. The claims-made policy also applies
because the claim was first made during its policy period for bodily
injury or property damage that occurred after the retroactive date.
According to the provision shown above, the occurrence policy is
primary and the claims-made policy is excess.
The other insurance clause does not state how coverage provided
by the policy’s extended reporting periods will coordinate with other
available insurance. This matter is governed by a separate provision
that is included in the extended reporting periods section of the policy
(see Chapter 4).
From the standpoint of defense cost coverage, the CGL coverage
forms will not respond for the payment of such costs when they are
considered to be excess to another insurer’s duty to defend the
insured. If no other insurer has the duty to defend the insured,
however, the coverage forms contain an affirmative statement that
the insurer will undertake the defense refused by another insurer, but
will then have all the insured’s rights against the insurer that refused
to defend.
When insurance under the CGL coverage forms is excess over
other insurance, the insurer agrees to pay its share of the amount
that exceeds the sum of (1) the total that the other insurance would
pay in absence of the excess insurance and (2) the total of all
deductible and self-insured amounts under that other insurance. Theinsurer, when excess, will share this remaining portion of the loss with
other applicable excess insurance that is not intended to apply in
excess of the insurance limits shown in the declarations.
Premium Audit
The premium audit condition of the current CGL forms is virtually
identical to the premium condition of the 1973 liability policy. Its
purpose is to make clear that all premiums for coverage are
computed with the insurer’s rates and rules; that the advance
premium is only a deposit premium and that final premium will be
based on an audit at the end of the policy period; and that the insured
must maintain such records as are deemed necessary by the insurer
to compute the premium.
Representations
The representations condition of the current CGL forms is
identical to the declarations condition of the 1973 policy. As a result
of this condition, the named insured agrees that (1) all statements
made in the declarations are accurate and complete, (2) those
statements are based on representations made by the named insured
to the insurer, and (3) the insurer has issued the policy based on such
representations.
Separation of Insureds
The separation of insureds condition of the current CGL forms is
also known as the severability of interests clause. As a matter of
interest and historical significance, this provision was first introduced
with the commercial auto policies in 1955, and with CGL policy
provisions in 1966. While there is no condition by the same name in
the 1973 policy, the content of this provision appears within the
definition of insured in the 1973 policy jacket. So, with the exceptionof the limits of insurance and the duties specifically assigned to the
first named insured, the insurance of both the old and the current
forms applies as if each named insured were the only named insured
and separately to each insured against whom claim or suit is brought.
Transfer of Rights of Recovery
This condition is the counterpart of the 1973 policy’s subrogation
clause. Apart from its longer title, the current provision expresses the
same content as the previous clause. This condition states that the
insurer has rights to recover all or part of any payment the insurer
makes, and the insured must do nothing after a loss to impair those
rights.
Even though the CGL policy automatically gives a waiver prior to
any loss, an endorsement also is available for use with the CGL (and
Owners and Contractors Protective Liability, OCP) forms to waive
subrogation. The endorsement for use with the CGL coverage form is
CG 20 24 and titled “Waiver of Transfer of Rights of Recovery
against Others to Us.” Given the fact that the condition of the CGL
form that is amended by this endorsement already permits a waiver
before a loss, what often begs a question is why this endorsement is
necessary.
According to ISO’s written explanation of this endorsement, it is
prescribed for use, before a loss occurs, to waive subrogation rights
against the person or organization scheduled in the endorsement. The
only possible explanations for this endorsement’s use are the
following:3
First, it could be an underwriting tool when an underwriter want to
control to whom waivers will be given for a particular insured.Second, it could be used in those minority of states, such as
California and Washington, where a waiver of subrogation is not
recognized prior to a loss, regardless of what the policy says.
Third, the endorsement could be issued to satisfy those who
request a policy waiver even though the policy provides that pre-loss
waivers are permitted.
The problem with the second reason is that, because of equitable
considerations given weight by the courts, it is not known for sure all
of the states are in the category that refuse to recognize a waiver
prior to a loss. To avoid problems, therefore, it might be a good idea
to have the endorsement issued to every CGL policy. Given the fact
that many insurers use their own independently filed CGL forms,
perhaps an insurer could issue a blanket waiver of subrogation, rather
than on a piecemeal basis.
Nonrenewal
Both versions of the CGL coverage form are subject to a
nonrenewal provision stating that if the insurer decides not to renew
the policy, it must mail or deliver to the first named insured written
notice of the nonrenewal not less than thirty days before the
expiration date. This provision, which was included in the 1986
claims-made coverage form itself, was added to the 1986 edition of
the occurrence form by means of endorsement CG 00 04. Since this
condition is now included in the 1990 and later editions of the
occurrence form, the endorsement is no longer needed. The policy
provision relating to cancellation—see below—is contained in the
common policy conditions form
Right to Claim InformationUnder the claims-made coverage form only, there is a condition
titled “your right to claim and occurrence information”, This condition
states that the first named insured has the right to obtain insurance
company records of reported occurrences and claim payments and
reserves relating to any claims-made policy that the insurer has
issued to the first named insured in the previous three years. If the
insurance company cancels or elects not to renew the policy, it must
provide the information no later than thirty days before the date of
policy termination. Otherwise, the insurer must only provide the
information if it receives a written request from the first named
insured within sixty days after the end of the policy period. In that
case, the insurer must provide the information within forty-five days
after receiving the request.
The common policy conditions are as follows:
Cancellation
The cancellation condition of the common policy conditions
expresses the same substance as that of the 1973 general liability
policy and enumerates the duties and obligations of the insured and
insurer in the event of cancellation. This condition states that the
policy can be cancelled by the insurer for nonpayment of premium by
giving the insured not less than ten days’ notice, whereas thirty days’
notice is required for any other reason.
Changes
The changes condition explains that the first named insured shown
in the policy declarations is authorized to make changes with the
insurer’s consent and that the policy’s terms can be amended or
waived only by endorsement issued by the insurer. The counterpart of
this condition under the 1973 liability policy states that notice to any
agent or knowledge possessed by any agent shall not affect a waiveror estop the company from asserting any right under the policy. This
statement, which is sometimes a source of problems, does not
appear in the current condition.
Examination of Books and Records
The examination condition of the current forms is comparable to
the “inspection and audit” condition of the 1973 policy. Its purpose
under both the current and the old contract is the same. It reserves
the insurer’s rights to examine the named insured’s books and
records at any time up to three years after the policy period.
Inspections and Surveys
The current inspections and surveys condition is considerably
longer than its counterpart under the 1973 policy. Its purpose is to
disclaim any implication that an inspection or survey by the insurer
constitutes an undertaking for the benefit of the insured or others
concerning the safety of any premises and operations.
The potential liability of insurers for engineering and safety
inspection services first became a real concern in 1964, following the
Illinois Supreme Court decision in Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp.,
199 N.E.2d 769. The court in this case held that an insurer of workers
compensation insurance was liable in tort for having failed to detect a
dangerous condition in the course of its inspection of a material hoist.
The court did not maintain that the insurer had a duty to perform an
inspection. Rather, the court held that after having done so, the
insurer was liable for its negligence in that regard.
As a matter of interest, the first standard general liability policy
provisions contained an Inspection and Audit Condition which read:
“The company shall be permitted to inspect the insured premises,
operations and elevators ….” The same wording of this conditionremained unchanged through the 1943, 1947 and 1955 policy
changes. After the Nelson case, however, this condition was
amended in 1966 (and has remained unchanged to date) with the
explanation by the National Bureau of Casualty Underwriters (NBCU)
that a modification was necessary in light of recent court decisions. In
its written memorandum of changes, the NBCU stated that the
modified condition indicates that “the company has the right but no
obligation to inspect the insured’s property and operations and that
neither the existence nor the exercise of the right to inspect shall
constitute an undertaking to determine or warrant that the property or
operations are safe.
Premiums
The premiums condition of the current CGL forms does not
appear to have a counterpart in the 1973 policy. It states that the first
named insured is responsible for the payment of premium and will be
the payee of any returned premiums by the insurer. If nothing else,
this condition does make clear who has the responsibility for paying
premiums in cases where there may be more than one named
insured in the policy.
Transfer of Rights and Duties
The transfer condition of the current forms is identical in effect to
the assignment clause of the 1973 policy. It is a stipulation of the
condition that no assignment of interest is binding without the insurer’s
consent. However, in the event of the named insured’s death, all
rights and duties will be transferred to the named insured’s legal
representative and until such representative is appointed, anyone
having proper temporary custody of the named insured’s property will
have the named insured’s rights and duties, but only with respect to
that property.This is a very problematic provision that is litigated frequently
because mergers and acquisitions have become so prevalent. The
problem is that insurers, as a general rule, are adamant that except in
the case of death of an individual insured, the named insured’s rights
and duties under the policy may not be transferred without the
insurer’s consent. What often happens is that because of a merger or
acquisition, the surviving company becomes embroiled in litigation that
had it genesis with the company that was purchased and sometimes
dissolved and the surviving company now seeks coverage under its
liability policy for those damages. With the stakes usually high, these
issues, as one might expect, lead to litigation where the results are
mixed. However, the consensus appears to be that this condition
having to do with transfer of rights holds that an assignment after a
loss cannot retroactively make the surviving entity an insured. The
assignment only entitles the surviving entity to the proceeds provided,
of course, that the purchased company is not still liable for any of the
damages.
If the purchased entity still has liability (as is often the case with
asset-only acquisitions), the surviving company cannot access
coverage of the purchased entity for losses that are still the
responsibility of the purchased entity.
The rationale is that the insurer may be adversely affected if the
surviving entity became an insured on the policy of the purchased
entity, but the insurer should not be adversely affected when a claim
or claims for the proceeds have been assigned, since the risk
remains the same before and after assignment.
Endnotes
1.      The following are the states that permit suits against co-
employees: Alaska, Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan,
New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Utah and Washington. (Source: Larson’s
Workers’ Compensation Desk Edition, (New York: MatthewBender & Co., Inc.) However, according to this same source,
the following states have statutory provisions permitting
intentional tort actions against co-employees: Alabama,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Florida, Hawaii,
Idaho, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Minnesota,
Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, West Virginia,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
2.      Donald S. Malecki, “Joint Venture Provision: Its Purpose and
Scope,” National Underwriter, Property and Casualty ed.,
June 17, 1977, p. 45.
3.      “Subrogation: To Waive Or Not To Waive,” Malecki on
Insurance, Oct. 1994, p. 5, Fort Thomas, KY: Malecki
Communications Company.Chapter 6
CGL Endorsements and
Miscellaneous Coverage Forms
ISO maintains a large portfolio of endorsements for amending the
CGL coverage forms to suit the needs of the insured or the insurer or
to satisfy particular state requirements. These endorsements are
summarized below, presented in order of their form numbers as
assigned by ISO. The first two digits of the form number indicate the
category to which the endorsement belongs; for example, all
endorsements designated CG 21 are exclusion endorsements.
Endorsements described here are limited to nationwide
endorsements; special state endorsements are not described. This
chapter also does not describe the following: pollution-related
endorsements because they are discussed in Chapter 1 as part of
the discussion of pollution exclusion f.; endorsements designed only
for use with the claims-made CGL form because these endorsements
are discussed in Chapter 4; or endorsements designed only for use
with general liability forms other than the CGL coverage forms (such
as the separate coverage form for products and completed
operations).
This chapter also describes two miscellaneous general liability
coverage forms that were introduced as part of the 2004 CGL
changes: the electronic data liability coverage form and the product
withdrawal coverage form.The descriptions that follow are merely summaries, intended for
quick reference purposes. For complete coverage details, the reader
is urged to review the actual ISO endorsements.
Deductible Endorsements
Currently, there is only one endorsement in this category, as
described below.
CG 03 00 Deductible Liability Insurance
The CGL coverage forms do not contain a deductible provision.
Endorsement CG 03 00 can be used to apply either a per claim
deductible or a per occurrence deductible to bodily injury liability,
property damage liability, or both coverages combined.
A per claim deductible, under this endorsement, applies to all
damages sustained by any one person or organization as a result of
any one occurrence. If, for example, a policy is subject to a per
person bodily injury deductible and four persons make claim for
injuries resulting from one occurrence, the deductible will apply
separately to each of the four claims. In contrast, a per occurrence
deductible applies to one occurrence only once, regardless of the
number of persons injured. It should be pointed out here that the per
claim deductible often is selected by named insureds based on price,
which is less expensive than the per occurrence deductible. What
named insureds do not realize, however, is that if a claim involves
more than one person or entity, when a per claim deductible is in
effect, the deductible applies separately to each claimant and that
amount can add up fairly quickly.
Under the pre-1993 version of this endorsement, both (1)
damages payable on behalf of the insured and (2) limits are reduced
by the deductible amount. However, the 1993 revision of thisendorsement applies on a damages-reduction basis only, in order to
maintain consistency with other liability lines.
Additional Coverage Endorsements
This category includes endorsements for various coverage
extensions.
CG 04 24 Coverage for Injury to Leased Workers
The employers liability exclusion e. excludes bodily injury to an
employee of the insured. Since the term “employee” is defined in
CGL forms to include leased workers, it is necessary that this
endorsement be issued in those cases where the employers liability
exclusion is not to encompass leased workers. The defined term
“employee” does not include temporary workers, but this
endorsement needs to mention that so as to make it clear that
temporary workers still remain outside of the employers liability
exclusion.
CG 04 31 Year 2000 Computer-Related and Other
Electronic Problems—Limited Coverage Options
An endorsement was introduced in 1998 for use with CGL forms
titled “Exclusion—Year 2000 Computer-Related and Other Electronic
Problems” in anticipation of massive computer-generated problems
on January 1, 2000, which actually did not happen, at least not in the
numbers that were estimated. When this endorsement was attached
and the underwriter was willing to modify the exclusion, some limited
coverage was available with CG 04 31. This endorsement provided
bodily injury, property damage, or personal and advertising injury (or
any combination) at the described location(s), operation(s) or for the
described product(s) or service(s).CG 04 35 Employee Benefits Liability Coverage
ISO introduced its Employee Benefits Liability Coverage
Endorsement with its 2001 amendments. The ISO endorsement has
many of same features as the employee benefits liability
endorsements that insurers have offered since the mid-1960s
following the landmark case of Gediman v. Anheuser Busch, 193
F.Supp. 72 (E.D.N.Y. 1961), rvs’d by 299 F.2d 537. In the ISO
endorsement, coverage is on a claims-made basis and applies to the
negligent acts, errors, or omissions committed by insureds in the
administration of the named insured’s employee benefit program,
defined to encompass group life insurance, group accident and health
programs, profit-sharing plans, pension plans, unemployment
insurance, workers compensation, disability benefits insurance, and
kindred plans. However, the endorsement does not cover fiduciary
liability of plans within the scope of the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974.
CG 04 36 Limited Product Withdrawal Expense
ISO introduced this endorsement with its 2001 amendments. As
its title connotes, the endorsement is intended to provide
reimbursement for certain expenses incurred because of a product
withdrawal due to a recall or tampering. Product withdrawal coverage
was first introduced by domestic insurers in the mid-1960s following
the enactment of the Consumer Product Safety Act. Coverage did not
sell well because by the time a prospective insured met the
underwriting requirements to purchase coverage, the limited coverage
was hardly worth the premium, or in some cases smaller businesses
could not afford to purchase it. Larger businesses, on the other hand,
that could afford to purchase this insurance, implemented recall
procedures but decided to expense recall costs if they arose rather
than to purchase this coverage. Most insurers therefore withdrew
their forms. The one advantage that the ISO endorsement offers is
some limited coverage for product tampering.This is an endorsement that, when introduced in 2001, was limited
in scope, just as its title connotes. Understandably, it is subject to a
cutoff date, meaning that the product subject to withdrawal, in order
to be covered, must have been produced after the date shown in the
endorsement schedule. Although the 2001 version of the
endorsement applied to the product withdrawal expenses incurred by
the named insured or by others who seek reimbursement, the kinds
of expenses covered and the extent of coverage were very limited.
This endorsement was amended in 2004 to further restrict
coverage, not only by adding more exclusions, but also by limiting
coverage solely to expenses incurred by the named insured. Any
expenses incurred by vendors in withdrawing the named insured’s
product and then seeking reimbursement under this endorsement
would not be covered. With this change, this endorsement’s use will
likely be very limited. (In fact, the sales history of products recall
coverage in general has not been overwhelming.)
The 2013 revisions produced by ISO do affect CG 04 36.
Paragraph B.3.a. of CG 04 36 provides, in part, that the insurer may
pay all or part of any deductible amount to effect settlement of any
claim or suit. Paragraph B.3.b. makes reference to the Participation
Percentage indicated in the Declarations. Since this endorsement
does not provide liability coverage or coverage for the cost or
expense of defending any suit brought against the insured, both of the
foregoing provisions are being amended. The reference in paragraph
B.3.a. “to effect settlement of any claim or suit” is being deleted,
since the insuring agreement of the endorsement applies to coverage
for product withdrawal expense and not for claims or suits. Likewise,
paragraph B.3.b is being revised to reinforce that the Participation
Percentage is indicated in the schedule of the endorsement, rather
than the Declarations. Also, reference to the word “loss” is revised to
explicitly refer to each “product withdrawal”.
CG 04 37 Electronic Data LiabilityIn 2002, ISO introduced what was referred to as the Electronic
Data Liability Endorsement. It was revised two years later, in part,
with the deletion of reference in its title to “Endorsement.” Subject to
an additional premium, this endorsement permits a buy-back of
coverage for loss to electronic data. The idea of this endorsement is
to not make it subject to exclusion p. of Coverage A in the CGL
coverage form, but rather to limit coverage solely to when there is
physical injury to tangible property. This endorsement provides
coverage by exception, using language that states coverage is
excluded for:1
Damages arising out of the loss of, loss of use of, damage to,
corruption of, inability to access, or inability to manipulate “electronic
data” that does not result in physical injury to tangible property.
Under this wording, no coverage applies in the absence of
physical injury to tangible property. Thus, if what happens results in
loss of use of tangible property not physically injured, no coverage
applies.
The above exclusion applies to “damages arising out of …
electronic data that does not result in physical injury to tangible
property.” Conversely, if damages arising out of electronic data
results in physical injury to tangible property, damages are covered;
for example, damages emanating from a plane crash caused by the
corruption of electronic data. (Note, however, the 2013 revisions now
provide coverage for damages because of bodily injury.)
It is important to note that the loss of electronic data limit of this
endorsement (actually a sublimit) is the most the insurer is required to
pay for property damage because of all loss of “electronic data”
arising out of one occurrence. Any covered other property damage
(physical injury to tangible property), on the other hand, would be
subject to the policy’s per occurrence limit.Additional Insured Endorsements
There are numerous situations in which the named insured of a
CGL policy is asked, or required by contract, to add another person
or organization as an additional insured under the named insured’s
policy. An array of endorsements is available for this purpose.
ISO introduced two revisions of additional insured endorsements
that became effective in 2004. The first revision dealt with certain
additional insured endorsements with an effective date of July, 2004.
The other revision dealt with changes of other endorsements and
forms with an effective date of December, 2004. Of the thirty-three
additional insured endorsements, ten of them were revised
extensively in an attempt to eliminate coverage for the additional
insured’s sole negligence. One endorsement, CG 20 09 Additional
Insured—Owners, Lessees, or Contractors—S cheduled Persons or
Organizations (For Use When Contractual Liability Coverage Is Not
Provided to You Under This policy), was withdrawn from use in 2004.
To the extent similar coverage is desired or needs to be issued, the
owners and contractors protective liability coverage part is available
for this purpose. Although endorsement CG 20 09 has been
withdrawn, its description in these pages will remain intact because of
the valuable background information it provides.
In 2013, ISO again revised additional insured endorsements. The
changes dealing with additional insured endorsements vary.
Issuing separate endorsements for each of the jurisdictions where
a named insured operates and is required to provide additional
insured endorsements can be cumbersome. So, instead of issuing
separate endorsements, as has been the case with some states, the
2013 revision attempts to make the applicable additional insured
endorsements flexible enough so that only one endorsement is
necessary.Taking Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—
Scheduled Person Or Organization CG 20 10, for example, the
coverage grant is the same as it was with the 2007 edition of this
endorsement. In other words, coverage applies to an additional
insured for bodily injury, property damage and personal and
advertising injury liability caused in whole or in part by (1) the named
insured’s acts or omissions; or (2) the acts or omissions of those
acting on the named insured’s behalf, but only for ongoing operations
at the locations designated in the endorsement schedule.
Newly added to the above wording by the 2013 revision, however,
are two additional provisions. The first provision states that the
insurance afforded to such additional insured only applies to the
extent permitted by law. The second provision, tied to the first one
with the conjunction “and” states that if coverage provided to the
additional insured is required by contract or agreement, the insurance
provided to the additional insured will not be broader than that which
the named insured is otherwise required by contract or agreement to
provide to the additional insured.
For purposes of illustration, assume that the person or
organization requiring additional insured coverage and the location of
the operations is New Jersey. Also, the anti-indemnification statute
(see more information on anti-indemnification laws below) requires
the named insured (indemnitor) to assume the partial fault of the
additional insured (indemnitee).
The state of New Jersey holds void sole fault, unless insurance is
available from an authorized insurer. This means sole fault coverage
is permitted. What was requested, however, was partial fault, which
also is permitted, but it does not have to be from an authorized
insurer. This means that this endorsement, as issued granting partial
fault, would apply.(In some cases, however, the endorsement grant of coverage
may be more than is sought by an additional insured who desires,
knowingly or not, strictly vicarious liability coverage or, at the other
extreme, sole fault coverage if written by an authorized insurer.)
Consider as another illustration, Alabama, where hold harmless
provisions are not void. If a contract were to require the assumption
of sole fault, the most that would be covered is the grant in CG 20
10; that is, partial fault. The reason is that this endorsement, CG 20
10, (as well as other additional insured endorsements incorporating
the same provision with the “however” clause) gives partial fault
coverage and then states, in effect, that such partial fault only applies
to the extent permitted by law, but hinges on what the contract
provides and is otherwise permitted by law. This provision could be
clearer. Whether a layperson would understand it remains to be seen.
(Note: To the extent that hold harmless agreements are held void
and unenforceable, additional insured status may likewise be void and
unenforceable. This revolves around anti-indemnification laws and
where these laws exist, they can vary by state. If one were to
categorize these laws into common groups, the result would be the
following:
•    Jurisdictions where both sole and partial fault agreements are
void and unenforceable, unless certain valid insurance applies
•    Jurisdictions where sole fault agreements are void and no
insurance exceptions are permitted
•    Jurisdictions where sole fault agreements are void, unless
certain valid insurance applies
•    Jurisdictions where sole and partial fault are void and no
insurance exceptions are permitted
•    Jurisdictions that do not hold void hold harmless provisions)It is important to note that, despite the jurisdictions that permit
sole fault coverage, many contracts prepared by or on behalf of
indemnitees only see vicarious liability. The thinking is that the
indemnitee is willing to be accountable for its sole fault and only
wants protection from the indemnitor for its sole fault. In other words,
it turns out to be a mutual or reciprocal contract that does not involve
the assumption of tort liability and, therefore, is not an insured
contract.
Another change affecting the additional insured endorsements,
within this category, deals with limits of insurance. This states that if
coverage provided to an additional insured is required by contract or
agreement, the most the insurer will pay on behalf of the additional
insured is: (1) the amount of insurance required by the contract or
agreement; or (2) the amount available under the applicable limits of
insurance shown in the Declarations, whichever is less. This
endorsement also does not increase the applicable limits of insurance
shown in the Declarations.
This revision affects the following additional insured
endorsements:
•    Additional Insured—Concessionaires Trading Under Your
Name, CG 20 03
•    Additional Insured—Controlling Interest, CG 20 05
•    Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects, or Surveyors, CG
20 07
•    Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—
Scheduled Person or Organization, CG 20 10
•    Additional Insured—Managers Or Lessors of Premises, CG
20 11•    Additional Insured—State Or Government Agency Or
Subdivision Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or
Authorizations, CG 20 12
•    Additional Insured—State Or Governmental Agency Or
Subdivision Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or
Authorizations Relating To Premises, CG 20 13
•    Additional Insured—Vendors, CG 20 15
•    Additional Insured—Mortgagee, Assignee Or Receiver, CG
20 18
•    Additional Insured—Executors, Administrators, Trustees Or
Beneficiaries, CG 20 33
•    Additional Insured—Owners Or Other Interest From Whom
Land Has Been Leased, CG 20 24
•    Additional Insured—Designated Person Or Organization, CG
20 26
•    Additional Insured—Co-Owner Of Insured Premises;
Additional Insured—Lessor Of Leased Premises, CG 20 27
•    Additional Insured—Lessor Of Leased Equipment, CG 20 28
•    Additional Insured—Grantor Of Franchise, CG 20 29
•    Additional Insured—Oil Or Gas Operations—N onoperating,
Working Interests, CG 20 30
•    Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects Or Surveyors, CG
20 31•    Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects Or Surveyors—
Not Engaged By The Named Insured, CG 20 32
•    Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—
Automatic Status When Required In Construction, CG 20 33
•    Additional Insured—Lessor Of Leased Equipment—
Automatic Status When Required In Lease Agreement With
You, CG 20 34
•    Additional Insured—Grantor Of Licenses—A utomatic Status
When Required By Licensor, CG 20 35
•    Additional Insured—Grantor Of Licenses, CG 20 36
•    Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or Contractors—
Completed Operations, CG 20 37
•    Additional Insured—State Or Governmental Agency Or
Subdivision Or Political Subdivision—Permits Or
Authorizations, CG 29 35
CG 20 01—Primary and Noncontributory—Other
Insurance Condition
The Primary and Noncontributory—O ther Insurance Condition
Endorsement, CG 20 01, is new under the 2013 revision. Its purpose
is to provide additional insureds with coverage on a primary and
noncontributory basis when it is required by a written contract or
agreement. The reason for this endorsement is to appease those
who not only demand confirmation on insurance certificates that their
additional insured coverage applies on a primary and noncontributory
basis, but also are in the position to require coverage on that basis.This new optional endorsement, however, is subject to two
conditions. The first condition is that the additional insured must be a
named insured on other insurance available to it. This is not likely to
be a problem, since it would be inadvisable for an indemnitee, for
example, not to maintain its own liability insurance as a backup.
Second, the named insured, on the policy to which this new optional
endorsement is attached, must have agreed in a written contract or
agreement that its insurance applies on a primary and noncontributory
basis; that is, the insurer issuing this endorsement will not seek
contribution from any other insurance available to the additional
insured. Whether that agreement will be delivered, as promised,
hinges on the facts of the matter and whether the insurer desires to
provide coverage.
It is important to keep in mind that this optional other insurance
endorsement will not work with anything other than ISO primary
policies, or independently filed policies using this ISO language. A
question that might arise is whether it actually is necessary to
mention that additional insured status applies not only on a primary
but also a noncontributory basis. In other words, what does the word
“noncontributory” add to the equation? Probably nothing.
An explanation of what contribution means is actually what
reference to insurance on a primary basis means. In effect, reference
to primary and noncontributory is mutually exclusive. Whether this is
what a person or organization seeking additional insured status thinks
it means is open to question. CG 20 01, in any event, explains
“noncontributory” in the same way as this example: This insurance
provided to the person or organization shown in the schedule is
primary insurance and we will not seek contribution from any other
insurance available to that additional insured.
Thus, nothing is changed with this new optional endorsement but it
nonetheless will likely be welcomed so long as it appeases those
persons or organizations seeking additional insured coverage, andthey receive some confirmation that their coverage applies on a
primary and noncontributory basis.
When this new optional endorsement is issued, note that it states
that it is “added to the Other Insurance Condition and supersedes any
provision to the contrary.” Part (2) of this optional endorsement also
states that the named insured has “agreed in writing … that this
insurance would be primary and would not seek contribution from any
other insurance available to the additional insured.” Instead of saying
“any other insurance”, it might have been clearer to say “any other
primary insurance”. The reason for saying this is that some insureds
(and their insurers) typically look for a way to tap another insured’s
excess liability limits; that is, by exhausting limits vertically, rather than
horizontally. Some people may say that this opinion is making a
mountain out of a mole hill. Perhaps it is, but if an insurer were to
attempt to seek contribution from an additional insured’s excess
insurance for some reason, there is a potential argument that might
have been avoided by inserting the word “primary” in the second
provision of this new optional endorsement.
CG 20 02 Additional Insured—Club Members
This endorsement includes any members of the named insured
club but only with respect to their liability for activities of the club or
activities they perform on behalf of the club. It is common today for
employers to add employee-related clubs to their liability policies,
such as those relating to golf, gun and rifle, health and sports, social
and stock investments. This is an employee benefit, particularly since
the insurance is a business expense. What must be considered
carefully, however, is how the club is listed in the entity’s CGL policy;
that is, as a named insured or an additional insured. The answer here
is that the club should be shown as a named insured because the
club’s members are not likely to be covered otherwise.Here is why. If the club is treated as a named insured, the club will
likely be rated as such with the automatic attachment of Additional
Insured – Club Members CG 20 02, as suggested in the classification
tables of the Commercial Lines Manual. This endorsement reads:
“WHO IS AN INSURED (Section II) is amended to include any of your
members, but only with respect to their liability for your activities or
activities on your behalf.” The words “you” and “your” refer to the
named insured. With more than one named insured applying to the
policy, those words should apply to the appropriate named insured;
the club in this instance as a named insured.
If the club were to be added as an additional insured, the above
endorsement would be of no significance, since the club members
would not be covered. The reason is that the words “you” or “your”
refer only to the named insured which, in this case, would be the
employer and not the club. With the club not being a named insured,
club members would not be considered additional insureds despite
the attachment of this endorsement.
CG 20 03 Additional Insured—Concessionaires Trading
under Your Name
CG 20 03 includes any concessionaire whose name is shown in
the endorsement (or in the policy declarations) but only with respect
to its liability as a concessionaire trading under the name of the
named insured.
CG 20 04 Additional Insured—Condominium Unit
Owners
CG 20 04 includes each individual unit owner of the insured
condominium but only with respect to liability arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or repair of that portion of the condominiumpremises that is not reserved for that unit owner’s exclusive use or
occupancy.
CG 20 05 Additional Insured—Controlling Interest
This endorsement includes any persons or organizations named in
the endorsement (or policy declarations) but only with respect to their
liability arising out of (1) their financial control of the named insured,
or (2) premises they own, maintain, or control while the named
insured leases or occupies those premises. However, the additional
insured is not covered with respect to structural alterations, new
construction, or demolition operations performed by or for the
additional insured.
CG 20 07 Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects, or
Surveyors
This endorsement includes any architect, engineer, or surveyor
engaged by the named insured but only with respect to liability arising
out of the named insured’s premises or “your work” (as defined in the
policy). (When the professional is not engaged by the named insured,
it is necessary to use CG 20 32.) The additional insured is not
covered for bodily injury, property damage, personal injury, or
advertising injury arising out of the rendering of or the failure to render
any professional services.
Until the 1993 policy revisions, this endorsement was available for
use with both the CGL and OCP coverage forms; under the revision,
this endorsement for engineers, architects, and surveyors became
available only with the CGL coverage forms. In addition, the coverage
of this endorsement became limited solely to operations in progress.
To make this change, the term “your work” was deleted because,
according to ISO, this term is used in a completed operationscontext. Substituted in the place of the term “your work” was the
phrase “ongoing operations performed by you or on your behalf.”
It is important for additional insureds in this category to
understand that they will have no protection under this endorsement if
they request coverage for a certain period after operations have been
completed.
This endorsement was extensively revised in 2004 in an attempt
to eliminate coverage for the sole negligence of the additional
insured. For a more complete discussion of the rationale for this
change and what coverage is intended to be provided, refer to the
discussion of endorsement CG 20 10.
The 2013 revision affects endorsement CG 20 07 (as well as CG
20 31 and CG 20 32, which also deal with engineers, architects or
surveyors as additional insureds). CG 20 07 falls into the category of
endorsements subject to coverage required by contract and meeting
the parameters of existing law. So, CG 20 07 is now also subject to
one additional revision that is said to be consistent with those applied
to the Professional Services Exclusion Endorsements.
CG 20 07 excludes professional services by or for the named
insured. Newly being added is another provision stating that no
coverage applies even if the claims against any insured “allege
negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring,
employment, training or monitoring of others by that insured”, if the
occurrence causing bodily injury or property damage, or the offense
causing personal and advertising injury involved the rendering of or
the failure to render any professional services by or for the named
insured. Given that the endorsement deals with additional insureds
who are professionals, this additional provision appears to make
sense.CG 20 08 Additional Insured—Users of Golfmobiles
CG 20 08 includes any persons using or legally responsible for
golfmobiles loaned or rented to others by the named insured or the
named insured’s concessionaire but only for their liability arising out of
the use of the golfmobiles.
The current endorsement to cover users of golfmobiles as
additional insureds, while not defining golfmobiles, provides coverage
to any person using or legally responsible for the use golfmobiles; it
does not limit additional insured status to persons using golfmobiles
for playing golf. The 2013 revision of CG 20 08 does define
golfmobile. The definition reads: For purposes of this endorsement,
golfmobile means a motorized conveyance that is designed to carry
up to four persons on a golf course for the purpose of playing golf;
and that is not built or modified after manufacture to exceed a speed
of 25 miles per hour on level ground.
Considering that golfmobiles are often used as transportation for
other than golfing purposes, the definition added to this endorsement
should be considered as a restriction of coverage.
CG 20 09 Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees, or
Contractors—Scheduled Persons or Organizations (For
Use When Contractual Liability Coverage Is Not
Provided to You under This Policy)
This endorsement was withdrawn from use in 2004 because of its
limited use, and the fact that the owners and Contractors Protective
Liability (OCP) coverage part provides identical coverage, except that
the OCP policy is a separate policy, unaffected by the purchaser’s
own CGL form. If endorsement CG 20 09 were to have been issued
instead, it would have applied on a primary basis, but only to the
extent that the CGL policy applied to the claim or lawsuit. Thedescription of this endorsement remains intact because of the
background information it provides.
CG 20 09 includes the person or organization named in the
endorsement (or policy declarations) but only with respect to liability
arising out of (1) “your work” performed for the additional insured at
the location designated in the endorsement, or (2) acts or omissions
of the additional insured(s) in connection with their general supervision
of “your work” at the designated location.
The person named as additional insured in this endorsement is
ordinarily a property owner or lessee for whom the named insured is
performing work under contract. The additional insured could also be
a general contractor for whom the named insured is working as a
subcontractor. The scope of coverage provided for the additional
insured is comparable to that provided for the named insured of the
ISO owners and contractors protective (OCP) liability coverage form.
The endorsement and the OCP coverage form are alternative ways
for a contractor to provide limited insurance for a property owner
during the course of the contractor’s work. When the endorsement is
used, the contractor shares its policy limits with the owner; when the
contractor obtains the separate OCP policy, the payment of claims
against the owner does not affect the contractor’s insurance.
The endorsement is subject to the following exclusions of the CGL
coverage form: a. (expected or intended injury), d. (workers
compensation and similar laws), e. (employer’s liability), f. (pollution),
h.2 (using mobile equipment for racing), i. (war), and m. (damage to
impaired property or property not physically injured). In addition, the
endorsement contains these exclusions:
1.    Bodily injury or property damage for which the additional
insured is liable solely by contract. There is no coverage for
liability assumed under “insured contracts.”2.    Bodily injury or property damage occurring after all work on
the project is completed or that portion of the work out of
which the injury or damage arises has been put to its
intended use. The endorsement, like the OCP coverage
form, does not provide completed operations liability
coverage.
3.    Property damage to: property owned or used by, or in the
care, custody, or control of the additional insured; or “your
work” for the additional insured.
Significantly, endorsement CG 20 09 also contains an exclusion of
bodily injury or property damage arising out of any act or omission of
the additional insured(s) or any of their employees, other than general
supervision of work performed for the additional insured(s) by the
named insured.
In the absence of this exclusion, the endorsement might be
interpreted to cover acts or omissions of the additional insured as
long as they result in the additional insured incurring “liability arising
out of …‘your work’ for the additional insured(s).” Some courts have
interpreted the phrase “liability arising out of” liberally in favor of the
insured to mean “originating from,” “growing out of,” or “flowing from,”
without a requirement of proximate causation. See, for example,
Merchants Insurance Company of New Hampshire, Inc. v. United
States Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 143 F.3d 5 (1st Cir. 1998).
However, because of the exclusion quoted above, endorsement
CG 20 09 covers acts or omissions of the additional insured only if
they are in connection with the additional insured’s general
supervision of “your work.” Endorsement CG 20 10, discussed below,
does not contain the exclusion in question.Because of the limited scope of this endorsement, some property
owners prefer to have the contractor indemnify and hold the owner
harmless for all liability arising out of the project and back the hold
harmless agreement with contractual liability insurance as evidenced
by a certificate of insurance.
This endorsement should see limited use because it is to be used
only when contractual liability coverage is not provided, that is, the
CGL policy is modified with contractual liability limitation endorsement
CG 21 39. This endorsement has the same effect as the 1973 CGL
policy without modification of the broad form CGL endorsement. The
result is contractual liability coverage limited solely to incidental
contracts.
As noted above, this endorsement’s coverage is limited solely to
operations while in progress. But because this endorsement referred
to the term “your work,” which is used in a completed operations
context, this endorsement was revised in 1993 to replace the term
“your work” with the phrase “your ongoing operations”. Another
revision to this endorsement was in 1997 when reference to Form A
was deleted and it was retitled to make clear that it is intended to
cover the additional insured(s) scheduled on the endorsement.
CG 20 10 Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees, or
Contractors—Scheduled Persons or Organizations
This endorsement, relied upon almost exclusively in connection
with construction-related work, was revised extensively in 2004. It
applies solely to ongoing operations and limits coverage for the
additional insured to bodily injury, property damage, personal and
advertising injury caused in whole or in part by (1) the named
insured’s acts or omissions, or (2) the acts or omissions of those
acting on the named insured’s behalf, in the performance of thenamed insured’s ongoing operations for the additional insured at the
locations designated in the schedule.
What the first part of this coverage condition means is that, unless
the named insured is responsible in whole or in part for resulting
injury or damage, the additional insured has no coverage. Sole
negligence of the additional insured, in other words, is not covered. If,
on the other hand, the additional insured can demonstrate that the
named insured is at least one percent at fault, as much as 99 percent
of fault attributable to the additional insured should be covered—on a
primary basis—provided ISO forms are used.
If the additional insured is not considered to be covered because
of coverage condition (1) above, there still may be an opportunity for
full or partial coverage under coverage condition (2). It all depends on
whether it can be shown that the additional insured was acting on
behalf of the named insured. These situations can include, for
example, where a general contractor is an additional insured, a
subcontractor is the named insured, and a claim or lawsuit is brought
against the general contractor for failing to properly provide a safe
place to work. There is a possibility for the general contractor to
maintain it was acting on the subcontractor’s behalf because, inherent
in that allegation of the general contractor’s failure to provide a safe
place to work, was the general contractor’s duty to do so on behalf
of the subcontractor. If that liability can be shown, the general
contractor, as an additional insured, could be covered to the same
extent as if it were a named insured. Only time will tell whether ISO’s
intent to seriously restrict additional insured coverage under this
endorsement will prevail.
Traditionally, this endorsement provided broad coverage to
additional insureds. In fact, it was the most commonly requested and
sought after endorsement for construction-related work, particularly
the November, 1985 edition of the endorsement. The reason was that
it included coverage for the additional insured’s sole negligence andfor both ongoing as well as completed operations. All of this officially
ended with the July, 2004 revisions from ISO, as explained
previously.
One of the more controversial parts of the pre-2004 edition of this
endorsement was the phrase arising out of. The reason was that it
did not require a direct causal relationship between the named
insured’s work or operations and the additional insured’s liability.
Coverage under this endorsement, instead, applied to an additional
insured even when the named insured was without fault, due to the
additional insured’s relationship with the named insured’s work.
The 1985 edition of this endorsement was amended in 1993 to
remove completed operations coverage. According to ISO, the intent
of this endorsement was to limit the additional insured’s coverage
only while operations were in progress; but the endorsement was not
clear on this point, because it referred to the term your work which,
according to ISO, did not make a distinction between ongoing and
completed operations. This endorsement was again amended in 1997
when reference to Form B was deleted and the endorsement was
retitled to make clear that it was intended to be used solely to
schedule additional insureds, and not to be used as though it were a
blanket endorsement.
Although the intent may have been to restrict coverage of this
endorsement to ongoing operations, it was possible in some fact
patterns to argue that coverage still applied after work had been
completed. The reason was that coverage applied to liability arising
out of the named insured’s ongoing operations. The trigger, in other
words, was at the time of liability (negligent act, error or omission)
and not at the time of injury or damage. To fix this potential problem,
ISO again revised this endorsement in 2001 by adding an exclusion of
when injury or damage does not apply. Because this endorsement
requires the scheduling of the additional insured’s name, it is likely tosee limited use. In fact, the trend for several years now has been for
insurers to issue blanket additional insured endorsements.
It is important to note that this endorsement cannot be used in a
state that has an anti-indemnity statute that holds void and
unenforceable sole and/or partial negligence of an indemnitee (one
who attempts to transfer the financial consequences of its acts or
omissions to the indemnitor) and does not make exception for the
validity of any insurance. States in this category include Colorado,
New Mexico, North Dakota and Oregon.2
CG 20 11 Additional Insured—Managers or Lessors of
Premises
A lease of real property may require the lessee to add the lessor
or property manager as an additional insured under the lessee’s CGL
policy. Designed to meet this type of requirement, endorsement CG
20 11 covers the person or organization named in the endorsement
for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the
premises leased to the named insured and scheduled in the
endorsement.
It may be a good idea to have this endorsement issued to a real
estate manager, even though the manager is already automatically
covered as an additional insured, in order to overcome the
primary/excess other insurance issue explained in Chapter 5.
The coverage for the additional insured is subject to all the
exclusions of the policy and also does not apply to (1) any occurrence
that takes place after the named insured ceases to be a tenant at the
scheduled location, or (2) structural alterations, new construction, or
demolition operations performed by or on behalf of the additional
insured.CG 20 12 Additional Insured—State or Political
Subdivisions
A named insured who obtains a permit from a state or political
subdivision to engage in certain activities may be required to name
the entity as an additional insured. The state or political subdivision
named in the endorsement is covered for operations performed by or
on behalf of the named insured for which the permit was issued. The
coverage for the additional insured is subject to all the exclusions of
the policy plus two exclusions stated in the endorsement. These
exclusions eliminate coverage for (1) operations performed for the
additional insured, and (2) products and completed operations.
CG 20 13 Additional Insured—State or Political
Subdivisions—Permits Relating to Premises
This endorsement insures a state or political subdivision that has
issued a permit in connection with premises owned, rented, or
controlled by the named insured. The state or political subdivision is
covered for the following:
1.    The existence, maintenance, repair, construction, erection, or
removal of advertising signs, awnings, canopies, cellar
entrances, coal holes, driveways, manholes, marquees,
hoistaway openings, sidewalk vaults, street banners, or
decorations and similar exposures; or
2.    The construction, erection, or removal of elevators; or
3.    The ownership, maintenance, or use of any elevators covered
by this insurance.
CG 20 14 Additional Insured—Users of Teams, Draft, or
Saddle AnimalsThis endorsement insures any person or organization using or
legally responsible for the use of draft or saddle animals or vehicles
for use with them, provided the use is by the named insured or by
others with permission of the named insured.
CG 20 15 Additional Insured—Vendors
CG 20 15 enables a manufacturer or distributor to add a retailer
or other vendor of its products to its own CGL or products liability
policy. The vendor named in the endorsement is covered for bodily
injury or property damage arising out of the products described in the
endorsement that are sold or distributed in the vendor’s business.
This endorsement was revised in 2004. Although this
endorsement’s coverage was thought to be limited to the vendor’s (1)
vicarious liability (that is, to liability imputed to the vendor because of
the acts or omissions of the named insured), or (2) partial and
independent fault, broader coverage apparently has been possible.
For this reason, and to make sure coverage does not apply for the
vendor’s sole fault, ISO has added an exclusion to its latest
endorsement that specifically precludes bodily injury and property
damage arising out of the sole negligence of the vendor or its
employees or anyone else acting on its behalf, subject to three
exceptions.
The first exception applies to inspections, adjustments, tests, or
servicing that the vendor has agreed to make or normally undertakes
to make in its usual course of business in the distribution or sale of
products.
The second exception applies to exclusion A.1.d. dealing with
repackaging, other than when unpacked solely for the purpose of
inspection, demonstration, testing, or the substitution of parts underinstructions from the manufacturer, and then repackaged in the
original container.
The third exception applies to exclusion A.1.f. which deals with
demonstration, installation, servicing, or repair operations, other than
those operations performed at the vendor’s premises in connection
with the sale of the product.
Because of the above exceptions to the vendor’s sole negligence,
the coverage of this endorsement is broader than that of other
endorsements that may be available from some insurers. The best
way to describe the ISO version is that it not only covers the vendor’s
liability as the conduit, but also as an instrumentality, of products or
services.
The vendor is a conduit because of its role in the stream of
commerce between it and the distributor or manufacturer. If a
defective product causes injury, for example, the vendor may be
named in a lawsuit simply because it was the conduit, i.e. the seller,
of the manufacturer’s product.
The vendor also could serve as an instrumentality. This means
doing something more than simply serving as a conduit, i.e.,
physically handling the product. For example, the additional insured—
vendors endorsement, CG 20 15 07 04, states that insurance
afforded to the vendor does not apply to any physical or chemical
change in the product made intentionally by the vendor. If any such
change were to be made negligently (unintentionally), coverage would
apply. Likewise, this endorsement does not apply to the vendor’s
liability stemming from repackaging a product, except when unpacked
solely for purposes of demonstrating, testing, or the substituting of
parts under instructions from the manufacturer, and then repackaged
in the original container. If the vendor inadvertently changes the
product which ultimately causes injury or damage, the vendor, serving
as an instrumentality of the product, should be covered.Other, more limited endorsements restrict coverage solely to
liability of the vendor as the conduit and not for its own acts or
omissions, unlike the ISO endorsement. This is an important
distinction commonly overlooked by the legal community when a claim
arises. In fact, it is not uncommon for insurers to deny coverage
under an ISO-type vendor’s endorsement, citing the case of
American White Cross Laboratories v. Continental Insurance
Company, 495 A.2d 152 (N.J. App. Div. 1985), which dealt with an
endorsement much more restrictive than the ISO version and limiting
coverage to the vendor’s role as a conduit, rather than also including
its role as an instrumentality.
CG 20 17 Additional Insured—Townhouse Associations
A townhouse association, like a condominium association,
requires at least two forms of liability insurance. The first is a
nonprofit directors and officers liability policy to cover the economic
damages that could result from their decisions. The other is a CGL
policy to protect them against their liability for injury or damage
sustained by others. When a CGL policy is issued to a townhouse
association, the above endorsement is appropriate to clarify that
townhouse owners who serve as members of the association are
protected as additional insureds.
This endorsement has been amended with the 1993 changes to
clarify that the endorsement does not cover any liability arising out of
the ownership, maintenance, use, or repair of the real property to
which the owner has a fee simple title.
CG 20 18 Additional Insured—Mortgagee, Assignee, or
Receiver
Paragraph F of the common policy conditions to the CGL policy
clarifies that in the event of the named insured’s death, all rights andduties are automatically transferred to the named insured’s legal
representative. The representative therefore is protected as an
insured without having to request an endorsement. However, other
legal representatives, such as a mortgagee of real property or an
assignee or receiver in bankruptcy proceedings, may also desire such
protection. If the insurer agrees, these persons or organizations
likewise can be protected with the issuance of the above
endorsement.
CG 20 20 Additional Insured—Charitable Institutions
The purpose of this endorsement is to amend the Who Is an
Insured provision of the CGL policy to more closely correspond to the
nomenclature of a charitable institution. When attached to the policy,
the endorsement includes as insureds the institution’s members with
respect to their activities on behalf of the institution, including trustees
and members who serve on the board of governors.
CG 20 21 Additional Insured—Volunteer Workers
Until revised in 1993, this endorsement was titled “Additional
Insured—Volunteers.” The purpose of the endorsement is to clarify
that the CGL policy will protect authorized volunteers to the same
extent as coverage is provided to employees. This means, for
example, that the so-called “fellow employee” exclusion that
commonly applies to employees will likewise apply to volunteers. ISO
withdrew this endorsement with the 2001 policy amendments, which
incorporated its provisions into the CGL coverage part.
CG 20 22 Additional Insured—Church Members and
Officers
The purpose of this endorsement is to amend the Who Is an
Insured provision of the CGL policy of a church to include thefollowing persons as insureds with regard to their church-related
activities or duties:
•    Church members
•    Trustees, officials, or members of the board of governors of
the church
•    Members of the clergy
The title of this endorsement was revised with the 2001
amendments with the deletion of reference to volunteer workers,
since the provisions relating to volunteer workers are incorporated
into the CGL policy.
CG 20 23 Additional Insured—Executors,
Administrators, Trustees, or Beneficiaries
As noted under endorsement CG 20 18, the common policy
conditions of the CGL policy recognize that the named insured’s rights
and duties under the policy will be transferred to a legal
representative in the event of the named insured’s death. There are
occasions, however, when legal representation becomes necessary
prior to the named insured’s death, such as when the insured is
incompetent or when there is a living trust. In any such event, the
issuance of this endorsement signifies that such person or
organization is an additional insured but only while acting within the
scope of his duties.
The 1993 revision of this endorsement expanded the category of
an insured to include any executor, administrator, trustee, or
beneficiary of the named insured’s living trust.
CG 20 24 Additional Insured—Owners or Other
Interests from Whom Land Has Been LeasedThis endorsement is virtually identical to CG 20 11—Additional
Insured—Managers or Lessors of Premises. The only apparent
difference between the two is that one applies specifically to land and
the other applies to the more general term “premises.”
CG 20 25 Additional Insured—Elective, Appointive
Executive Officers—Public or Municipal Corporations
The purpose of this endorsement is to amend the Who Is an
Insured provision to correspond more closely to the nomenclature of
public and municipal corporations.
CG 20 26 Additional Insured—Designated Person or
Organization
The endorsement is designed to provide protection to a person or
organization, as an additional insured, whose status may not
otherwise qualify for one of the other additional insured endorsements
and the insurer is still willing to cover the scheduled entity. This
endorsement was commonly requested as an alternative to additional
insured endorsement CG 20 10 carrying the 1985 edition date. It is
still commonly relied on as a substitute for endorsement CG 20 10.
This is also one of the endorsements that was amended in 2004
with the restriction that the bodily injury, property damage, and
personal and advertising injury be caused in whole or in part by the
named insured’s acts or omissions or the acts or omissions of those
acting on the named insured’s behalf.
One of the problems with this endorsement, insofar as insurers
are concerned, is that coverage may not necessarily be limited solely
to ongoing operations. Under some circumstances, coverage could
apply even after operations are completed. The reason is that
coverage is not limited to bodily injury or property damage arising outof ongoing operations, but instead to liability in the performance of the
named insured’s ongoing operations. There can be instances,
therefore, when negligence occurs during the performance of ongoing
operations, but injury or damage does not occur until after operations
are completed. Also, there is no wording in this endorsement stating
that insurance does not apply to injury or damage occurring after all
work to be performed has been completed, or at least that portion of
the named insured’s work that has been put to its intended use by
someone other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in
performing operations on the same project.CG 20 27 Additional
Insured—Co-owner of Premises.
The named insured who owns several properties, some of which
are co-owned, may require this endorsement to protect the interests
of those with whom property is co-owned. Both the name of the
person or organization and the location of premises must be
described on the endorsement.
CG 20 28 Additional Insured—Lessor of Leased
Equipment
When a person or organization leases equipment, it may be
required to add the lessor as an additional insured on the lessee’s
CGL policy. This is the endorsement earmarked for that purpose. It
should be noted, however, that it will not protect the lessor against its
sole negligence. Coverage instead is limited to liability caused in
whole or in part by the named insured’s maintenance, operations, or
use of equipment leased to the named insured by the person or
organization identified in the endorsement.
This endorsement is intended to be used only to schedule (name)
the additional insured. A blanket endorsement (CG 20 34) also is
available for those common situations when lessors need to be given
additional insured status.CG 20 29 Additional Insured—Grantor of Franchise
When the grantor of a franchise requires protection as an
additional insured on the CGL policy of the grantee, this is the
endorsement designed for that purpose.
CG 20 30 Oil or Gas Operations—Nonoperating,
Working Interests
This endorsement is designed to add as insureds those persons
or entities that have a nonoperating, working interest in any oil or gas
lease, such as investors. When this endorsement is attached it
amends the Who Is an Insured provision by providing such insureds
with protection in the event claim or suit is brought against them
because of their nonoperating or working interest.
CG 20 31 Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects, or
Surveyors
This endorsement was introduced for use with the 1993 policy
amendments. It is designed for use solely with the OCP policy.
However, its scope is identical to its counterpart endorsement, CG 20
07, which is used when the professional is engaged by the named
insured.
CG 20 32 Additional Insured—Engineers, Architects, or
Surveyors Not Engaged by the Named Insured
Endorsement CG 20 07, discussed earlier in this chapter, is
available for naming as an additional insured an engineer, architect, or
surveyor hired by the named insured. The purpose of endorsement
CG 20 32, in contrast, is to provide additional insured status to an
engineer, architect, or surveyor that has not been hired by the namedinsured. This situation might arise, for example, if the named insured
is a construction company that has been hired by a property owner to
work on a project with an engineer, architect, or surveyor that has
also been hired by the property owner, and the contract requires the
named insured to name the engineer, architect, or surveyor as an
additional insured under the named insured’s CGL policy.
This is another one of the endorsements that limits coverage to
liability caused in whole or in part by the named insured’s acts or
omissions, or the acts or omissions of those acting on the named
insured’s behalf in the performance of the named insured’s ongoing
operations performed by the named insured or on the named
insured’s behalf.
The endorsement also adds to the policy a professional services
exclusion with respect to the engineers, architects, or surveyors
named in the endorsement’s schedule.
CG 20 33 Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees or
Contractors—Automatic Status When Required in
Construction Agreement with You
With the growing demand for additional insured status under
endorsement CG 20 10 dealing with owners, lessees, or contractors,
and the inability of underwriters to issue a blanket endorsement
without first amending endorsement CG 20 10 to apply on that basis,
ISO decided to issue a blanket, automatic endorsement in 1997, CA
20 33. As its title connotes, the endorsement’s use is limited to
instances where additional insured status is required in a construction
agreement with the named insured that is in writing. Other than that
requirement, the coverage is identical to the additional insured
endorsement CG 20 10.Because underwriters will not be able to review additional insured
requests on an individual basis to determine what other
endorsements might be required, such as exclusionary endorsements
relating to professional liability exposures, this endorsement
automatically includes a professional services exclusion. The problem
with this exclusion is that it applies to all insureds. Thus, the fact that
the policy contains a separation of insureds condition is likely to have
no effect, because the exclusion applies to injury or damage arising
out of the rendering or failure to render professional services,
regardless of who performed or failed to perform them.
Another problem with CG 20 33 are the words “with you”. One
should not, of course, rely on the title of endorsements, but those two
words limit the persons or organizations desiring additional insured
status to only those involved in the contract; in other words, only
those in privity. This endorsement, for example, will not cover so-
called “upstream” persons or organizations desiring additional insured
status, such as projects owners when the contract is between a
general contractor and subcontractor, or when a general contractor
(and project owner) desires additional insured status when the
contract is between a subcontractor and subsubcontractor.
Since this endorsement excludes the professional services
exposure, it was revised in the 2013 edition to include the following
additional exclusion: no coverage applies even if the claims against
any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision,
hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others by that insured.
(CG 20 33, by the way, is likely to see limited use in the future
because of the introduction of endorsement CG 20 38, Additional
Insured—Owners, lessees, Or Contractors—A utomatic Status For
Other Parties When required In Written Construction Agreement. See
the discussion on CG 20 38).CG 20 34 Additional Insured—Lessor of Leased
Equipment—Automatic Status When Required in Lease
Agreement with You
ISO introduced this endorsement in 1997 to accommodate
lessees who are required to provide additional insured status to
lessors of leased equipment without being required to name such
persons or organizations in the endorsement.
In order for a party to qualify for the issuance of this
endorsement, there must be a written contract or agreement
requiring such additional insured status. The coverage that applies is
limited to liability for bodily injury, property damage, and personal and
advertising injury caused in whole or in part by the named insured’s
maintenance, operation, or use of equipment leased to it by such
person or organization. Any injury or damage caused by faulty
maintenance on the part of the additional insured would not be
covered. The additional insured’s status as such also ends when the
contract or agreement with the named insured for the leased
equipment ends. This coverage also does not apply to any
occurrence that takes place after the equipment lease expires.
CG 20 35 Additional Insured—Grantor of Licenses—
Automatic Status When Required by Licensor
This endorsement was introduced by ISO with the 2001
amendments to facilitate the requests of persons or organizations
who desire additional insured status for grantors of licenses. This
endorsement will cover such grantors of licenses who make and
distribute products.
An example given by ISO is a sweatshirt manufacturer who
imprints the logo of universities or professional sports teams. In order
for manufacturers to use the logo and sell the products, they mustfirst obtain a license from the institution. To that end, licensors may
contractually require that they be named as additional insureds on the
licensees’ liability policies. The automatic status ends when the
licensing agreement is no longer in existence between the two
parties.
CG 20 36 Additional Insured—Grantor of Licenses
This endorsement, like the preceding one, was introduced for use
in 2001, and amended in 2013. It is used to amend the Who Is An
Insured clause on the CGL form to include as an insured the person
or organization shown in the endorsements schedule, but only with
respect to their liability as a grantor of a license to the named
insured. Generally this endorsement is valuable when requests for
licenses are infrequent, so the grantor of the license can therefore be
scheduled on the endorsement.
CG 20 37 Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees, or
Contractors—Completed Operations
Currently the requests for additional insured status on a sole fault
basis including completed operations coverage in the construction
setting are frequent, and only one current ISO additional insured
endorsement (CG 20 26) can accommodate those requests.
However, that endorsement applies on a scheduled basis. Some
insurers are using the 1985 edition of CG 20 10 and charging an
additional premium.
To meet the growing requests of additional insureds who
prescribe completed operations coverage in their written contracts,
ISO introduced, with its 2001 amendments, the above titled
endorsement to be issued for an additional premium on a scheduled
basis, that is, naming the person or organization and describing the
location and description of the completed operations. However, itcannot be written alone, since coverage is limited to completed
operations. Either the blanket additional insured endorsement CG 20
33 or the scheduled one, CG 20 10 is required, since both grant
additional insured coverage limited to ongoing operations and, as of
the 2001 edition, specifically exclude the completed operations
hazard.
CG 20 38 Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees or
Contractors—Automatic Status for Other Parties When
Required In Written Construction Agreement
As mentioned with reference to Additional Insured—Owners,
Lessees Or Contractors—A utomatic Status When Required In
Construction Agreement With You CG 20 33, the words “With You” in
this title and in the context of this endorsement will not apply to a
person or organization desiring additional insured status if it is not a
party to the contract or agreement. In other words, there is no privity.
Examples are project owners who want additional insured status
when the contract is between the general contractor and
subcontractor, and when a general contractor (and project owner)
request additional insured status when the contract is between a
subcontractor and subsubcontractor. These persons or organizations
not in privity with the parties involved in the contract are referred to
as “upstream” insureds. It would be possible to automatically provide
these upstream persons or organizations with additional insured
coverage under this endorsement with the elimination of the words
“With You”. Instead, however, ISO is introducing another blanket
automatic endorsement titled, Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees
Or Contractors—A utomatic Status For Other Parties When Required
In Written Construction Agreement, CG 20 38.
(Obtaining upstream status is a problem. Two court cases, of
undoubtedly many, that exemplify that problem are AB Green
Gansevoort, LLC v. Peter Scalamandre & Sons, Inc., et al. 102A.D.3d 425 (2013), and Westfield Insurance Co. v. FCL Builders,
Inc., 948 N.E.2d 115 (2011).)
Although this new automatic additional insured endorsement CG
20 38 is an optional one, it should be recommended in every instance,
since it can avoid some problems for producers. Without this new
endorsement, producers would have to read every contract to
determine whether any upstream persons or organizations were
involved and then be careful how the certificate of insurance is
prepared. Confirming that additional insured status exists but that it
does not apply to upstream insureds could present problems to
producers, such as accusations of failure to procure coverage. With
this new optional endorsement, producers do not have to read
contracts (many do not anyway) and can feel somewhat more secure
in listing additional insured status on the certificate.
It is important to note, however, the maximum coverage that
would apply is the additional insured’s partial fault and that is subject
to what is required in the contract and whether that requirement is
otherwise permitted by law. It is also important to keep in mind that
new automatic endorsement is a standard ISO issue; whether other
insurers will follow suit is open to question. Finally, caution should be
exercised that some disingenuous insurer does not issue an
endorsement with the same title but preclude coverage for upstream
insureds in the body of the copy. In other words, one should not rely
fully on the title of endorsements; the endorsements need to be read
fully.
Exclusion Endorsements
There are many situations when either an insured or an insurer will
desire to exclude certain coverages that may otherwise be provided
by or potentially within the coverage of the policy. ISO has prepared
the following endorsements to be used for the purposes as noted.CG 21 00 Exclusion—All Hazards in Connection with
Designated Premises
This endorsement is designed for at least three purposes. The
first is to convert the CGL form to a more limited form of protection
comparable to the Owners, Landlords, and Tenants (OL&T) policy
that was replaced by ISO when the current CGL forms were
introduced in 1986. This endorsement also can be used to exclude a
given location that presents an exposure that the underwriter does
not wish to undertake, or to exclude a location that may be
specifically covered under a separate policy. Whatever the reason,
both Coverages A and B are eliminated with respect to the premises
designated in the endorsement, along with operations emanating from
those premises, including goods or products manufactured or
distributed from those premises.
Except for some isolated situations, this endorsement is not suited
for use with the CGL policy provisions. In fact, this endorsement may
nullify two major advantages of the CGL policy: 1) automatic
coverage for new insurable exposures related to existing ones, and 2)
those new exposures not related in any way to existing covered ones.
CG 21 01 Exclusion—Athletic or Sports Participants
The purpose of this endorsement is to make clear that the named
insured who is a sponsor of any sport or athletic contest, event, or
exhibition, as described therein, will not have any insurance under its
policy for bodily injury sustained by a person while he or she is a
participant in such an event; there is accident insurance available for
this kind of an exposure. However, this endorsement would not
preclude coverage if a third party were to be allegedly injured by such
a participant.Many businesses engage in either paying for specified equipment
or writing a check to a little league or other athletic contest, event or
exhibition. A question here is at what point is an event or sport
considered to be sponsored as opposed to one involving a donation?
The distinction between sponsoring or simply donating money or
material things is usually not an issue in relation to liability so long as
there is no exercise of control, which, if present, can create a liability
exposure. If a business provides nothing more than a donation,
whether to purchase equipment or to obtain some form of advertising,
such as sponsorships of a bowling team, a little league baseball or
soccer team, it may be difficult to place responsibility on the sponsor
or donor for resulting injuries or damage. Some of the important
considerations for avoiding accountability (liability), following a
monetary donation or purchase of equipment for the event are to (1)
not control the event; (2) not hold the event on the sponsor’s or
donor’s business property; or (3) not conduct itself so as to give the
impression a joint venture exists between itself and the entity actually
conducting the event.
When all of the foregoing are avoided, and there is no other
activity that would indicate or imply a strict business relationship,
businesses might enjoy the benefits of being a sponsor without the
accompanying liability that may result in an obligation of pay
damages. Much will depend on the laws of various jurisdictions and
the specific activity.
CG 21 04 Exclusion—Products/Completed Operations
Hazard
This endorsement is designed to exclude both bodily injury and
property damage arising from the products-completed operations
hazard, as that term is defined in the CGL forms. The endorsement
can be used when an insured does not desire products-completed
operations liability insurance for some reason, or the underwriter is
not willing to provide that coverage. However, this endorsementshould not be used when, for example, a classification automatically
includes products liability coverage as part of the premises-
operations exposure. The reason is that if an additional products
exposure arises during the policy period, it will be excluded if this
endorsement has been issued.
CG 21 16 Exclusion—Designated Professional Services
The apparent purpose for this endorsement is to exclude those
professional liability exposures that are best covered by other
specialty policies. It can be a troublesome exclusion for both the
insured and the insurer.
Insureds must be especially careful to see that the exposure to be
excluded can be covered under a professional liability policy. If, for
example, this endorsement were to be attached to the CGL policy of
an insurance agency, the insured could be without vital insurance
coverage. The reason is that an agent’s errors and omissions policy
generally excludes liability because of bodily injury, property damage,
personal injury, and advertising injury. If the insured were a physician
instead, this exclusion would be more acceptable because medical
malpractice liability policies commonly include coverage against all
injury without definition.
This endorsement also can be a problem to insurers because the
term “professional services” is not defined. Its meaning therefore may
be a question that only a court can answer.
CG 21 17 Exclusion—Movement of Buildings or
Structures
This endorsement is designed to make clear that no coverage will
apply to an organization whose business may involve the movement
of buildings or structures. This is an exposure that requires a specialrate. The reason for excluding liability because of personal injury and
advertising injury is not readily apparent, since neither is likely to be
the result of such an exposure.
CG 21 31 Limited Exclusion—Designated Operations
Covered By a Consolidated (Wrap-Up) Insurance
Program
This endorsement is similar to endorsement 21 54, except that
coverage under the CGL policy remains intact for the work that was
performed by the named insured under a wrap-up when the wrap-up
has been cancelled, has expired, or is no longer available to the
named insured contractor for reasons other than the exhaustion of the
wrap-up policy’s limits.
Stating that the exclusion for projects covered by a wrap-up
program does not apply if the wrap-up no longer applies for any
reason other than exhaustion of limits means that the exception can
apply in a variety of ways. However, since the last sentence of the
last paragraph of this endorsement states that the named insured
must advise the insurer of any cancellation, nonrenewal or
termination, some insurers are likely to argue that the exception to
this exclusion applies only when the policy has been cancelled,
nonrenewed or terminated and nothing more.
CG 21 32 Communicable Disease Exclusion
In the wake of diseases that can be transmitted from one person
to another, ISO, on behalf of its insurers felt the time was ripe to
make available an endorsement to exclude bodily injury, property
damage, personal injury and advertising injury arising out of the actual
or alleged transmission of a communicable disease. Although
communicable disease is undefined in this endorsement, the ISO
explanatory memorandum accompanying the introduction of thisexclusionary endorsement mentions the following three kinds of
diseases that apparently are of concern to underwriters: (1) avian flu,
(2) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), and (3) rotaviruses
(an infection that affects children and involves diarrhea).
CG 21 33 Exclusion—Designated Product
This endorsement is designed to exclude coverage for bodily
injury and property damage arising from the product designated in the
endorsement. Such an endorsement can be attached to either the
CGL or products/completed operations liability coverage parts. This
endorsement may be used by an underwriter who does not wish to
cover a particular exposure, or it can be used at the insured’s
discretion when a given products exposure is being covered by
another liability policy or being handled under a captive or self-
insurance program.
CG 21 34 Exclusion—Designated Work
The reasons for using this endorsement correspond to those
dealing with designated products. However, the exposure excluded
here concerns the named insured’s work, that is, work performed by
or on its behalf and including materials, parts, or equipment furnished
in connection therewith. This is an ideal exclusion when a construction
contractor is performing certain work under a wrap-up program being
handled on an “ex-insurance” basis; that is, where the project owner
or general contractor is providing all the insurance.
CG 21 35 Exclusion—Coverage C—Medical Payments
Medical payments coverage was originally designed to reduce the
chances of a subsequent bodily injury lawsuit and to enhance a
business’s goodwill; whether those purposes are served by this
coverage is uncertain. However, sometimes underwriters are notinterested in providing this coverage—which is payable without having
to show fault—for businesses where there is high potential for bodily
injury claims, such as restaurants, bowling alleys, and schools. In
addition, those businesses that are not overly concerned about this
kind of goodwill and are more interested in cutting insurance costs
may exercise their right to use this exclusion.
If medical payments coverage is excluded by this endorsement,
the supplementary payments provision is modified by this
endorsement with some additional, limited protection for expenses
incurred by the insured for first aid as may be administered to others
at the time of an accident involving bodily injury. While there is no limit
on the amount payable, coverage is contingent on bodily injury that
would otherwise be covered by the policy. This limited protection also
is referred to as “immediate medical payments coverage.”
The 1993 amendment to this endorsement clarified that coverage
is limited to the payment of first aid expenses administered to others
at the time of the accident. Some cosmetic changes were made to
this endorsement with the 2001 edition, but without change in the
scope of coverage.
CG 21 36 Exclusion—New Entities
The CGL policy automatically includes under the Who Is an
Insured provision any organization the named insured acquires or
forms, other than a partnership or joint venture, and over which the
named insured maintains ownership or majority interest. However,
such automatic coverage is limited to ninety days or the end of the
policy, whichever is earlier. This endorsement eliminates all automatic
protection for new entities that would otherwise apply in the
endorsement’s absence. The endorsement may be required for
underwriting reasons or by an insured who desires to maintain a
policy for one entity.This endorsement was revised editorially effective in March, 2005,
with no impact on coverage. However, a possible complication here is
that if products and completed operations coverage is not otherwise
excluded, coverage still applies for any goods or products
manufactured, sold, handled, distributed, or disposed by a person or
organization whose business or assets the named insured has
acquired. The entity itself may not be covered, but liability emanating
from its goods or services apparently would.
CG 21 37 Exclusion—Employees and Volunteer Workers
as Insureds
Since the introduction of the 1986 CGL policy provisions,
employees have been automatically included as additional insureds.
Prior to that time, employees had to be added by endorsement,
either with an employees as insured endorsement or as part of the
broad form CGL endorsement. The addition of coverage for
employees is viewed by some as a perk or one of the many other
benefits employees receive from their employers. Employers also
could be confronted with a problem if an insurer were to defend and
pay damages on behalf of the employer and then file a subrogation
action against a negligent employee who is also not an insured.
Employees may also be more readily helpful to employers in the
event of litigation confronting both.
However, there may be instances when an employer does not
want its employees covered as insureds, or an underwriter may not
desire to cover employees, particularly following a frequency of
claims. Whatever the reason, an exclusion is available to exclude
employees. Now that volunteers are automatically included within the
CGL policy provisions as of the 2001 amendments, this endorsement
also takes care of deleting volunteers as additional insureds when
necessary.When this endorsement was attached to CGL policy provisions,
some insurers apparently found out that even though employees were
not considered to be insureds, coverage remained intact for an
employer’s vicarious liability arising out of employees’ employment-
related acts or omissions involving aircraft, autos, and watercraft.
The reason coverage applied to the employer was that the aircraft,
autos, and watercraft exclusion did not apply when these vehicles
were operated by someone other than an insured, such as
employees excluded by endorsement.
So with the 1997 revisions involving primarily endorsements, ISO
closed that gap. The result is that exclusion g. directed at bodily injury
or property damage arising out of the ownership, maintenance, use,
or entrustment to others of any aircraft, auto, or watercraft, not only
applies to those vehicles owned, operated by, rented or loaned to
any insured, but also to any employee or volunteer (now defined
terms) while in the course of his or her employment. The impact of
this part of the exclusion is that coverage for employer’s
nonownership liability, stemming from the acts of its excluded
employees and volunteers, should be the subject of commercial auto,
aircraft, or watercraft insurance. However, nonownership coverage
remains intact for liability emanating from the acts or omissions of, for
example, any independent contractor who is not also an insured. This
latter exception in all likelihood applies for purposes of any gray area
gaps that are possible between the CGL and other policies
mentioned, but on an excess basis.
The other provision of CGL policy exclusion g. modified by this
endorsement in 1997 deals with the subparagraph (3) exception of
the parking of nonowned autos on or on the ways next to the
premises owned or rented to the named insured. By exception to the
current policy exclusion, coverage does apply as long as the auto is
not owned by or rented or loaned to the named insured or any
insured. Were it not for the endorsement’s change in 1997, coverage
would have applied to the employer’s vicarious liability in thisinstance, too. However, the endorsement precludes coverage even
here for the employer’s vicarious liability when employees are
excluded as insureds.
A new revision was made to this exclusion in June, 2015 which
changed the endorsement so that it may now be used when an
unmanned aircraft endorsement that replaces Exclusion g. is also
attached to the policy. This sort of revision is becoming more and
more necessary with the rising popularity of drones in today’s society.
As noted above, this endorsement was modified with the 2001
amendments to include volunteers because they are automatically
covered by CGL policy provisions.
CG 21 38 Exclusion—Personal and Advertising Injury
The purpose of this endorsement is to exclude both the personal
injury and advertising injury coverages automatically included in the
CGL forms. It is more likely to be used as an underwriter’s tool to
preclude coverage, than an endorsement that a business may desire
to be issued for purposes of cutting costs. If personal injury coverage
is desired and advertising injury is not, the appropriate endorsement
is CG 21 40 Exclusion—Advertising Injury.
CG 21 39 Contractual Liability Limitation
When this endorsement, which was introduced in 1988, is issued,
it eliminates the blanket contractual liability coverage that
automatically applies under the CGL form and replaces it with
protection that is limited to the insured contract as defined: L- lease
of premises; E-easement agreements; A-agreements required by
municipalities other than for work to be performed for municipalities;
S-side track (railroad) agreements; and E-elevator maintenance
agreements. The effect of this endorsement is to limit the coverage tothe equivalent of what is known as incidental contracts coverage
under the 1973 comprehensive general liability policy provisions. This
endorsement can only serve to the detriment of indemnitors (those
who assume the financial consequences of tort liability of others)
where (1) anti-indemnity statutes exist that preclude sole or partial
negligence but remain unaffected by the validity of contractual liability
or additional insured status,3 or where (2) no hold harmless provisions
prohibitions exist and indemnitors assume the sole or partial fault of
indemnitees.4
The 1993 revision to this endorsement made four changes: (1)
substituted letters for the numbered contracts comprising the defined
term “insured contracts”; (2) changed the definition of insured
contract to track with the language used in paragraphs a. through e.
of the definition of insured contract in the CGL and products coverage
forms; (3) deleted the requirement that the insured contract be in
writing; (4) deleted the exception at the end of the endorsement and
added language to paragraph a. of the definition to indicate that a
contract for a lease of premises does not include that portion of such
contract that indemnifies any person or organization for damage by
fire to premises rented to the named insured or temporarily occupied
by the named insured with permission of the owner.
CG 21 40 Coverage B—Personal Injury Liability Only
(Advertising Injury Liability Not Included) (Occurrence
Version)
Until retitled as noted above in the 1992 and 1996 CGL revisions,
this endorsement was titled “Exclusion—Advertising Injury.” The
purpose of the endorsement remains the same: to limit Coverage B
of the CGL coverage form (occurrence version only) to personal
injury liability coverage. Endorsement CG 21 48 can be used for the
same purpose with the claims-made version of the CGL coverage
form.ISO withdrew both of these endorsements in the 1998 CGL
revisions because the personal injury and advertising injury definitions
were combined into one definition of personal and advertising injury in
the 1998 CGL forms.
CG 21 41 Exclusion—Intercompany Products Suits
The manufacturer and its subsidiaries that process components of
a product or distribute them may be charged more than once for their
products liability coverage. This so-called double dipping is viewed as
being warranted among insurers because the liability policy will
provide coverage and defense if one insured sues another insured.
This is known as cross liability coverage. If such suit is remote, it
might be to the manufacturer’s advantage to delete these
intercompany sales in calculating products liability insurance
premiums. But to compensate for that cut in costs, the insurer may
insist on this intercompany products suits exclusionary endorsement.
Note that the exclusion is limited solely to the named insured’s
products hazard. Thus, all other cross liability exposures are covered,
unless specifically excluded.
CG 21 42 Exclusion—Explosion, Collapse, and
Underground Property Damage (Specified Operations)
This is one of two exclusionary endorsements that are available to
modify the coverage that is otherwise available automatically under
the CGL form against damage caused by the explosion, collapse, and
underground hazards. This endorsement is designed to exclude
coverage at the described location against the designated hazard:
explosion, collapse, underground property damage, or any
combination thereof.
Note that this endorsement has been shown incorrectly to also be
applicable to the products and completed operations liability coveragepart. Reference to that coverage part was eliminated in the 2004
revisions of the CGL program.
CG 21 43 Exclusion—Explosion, Collapse, and
Underground Property Damage Hazard (Specified
Operations Excepted)
When this endorsement is attached to the policy, all coverage
against the X, C, and U hazards, as automatically provided by the
policy, is excluded, except as designated in the exclusion. This
endorsement has been shown incorrectly to also be applicable to the
products and completed operations liability coverage part. This
reference has been eliminated with the 2004 revisions.
Both of the above endorsements commonly are used by
underwriters who do not wish to provide X, C, and U coverage on a
blanket and automatic basis. They prefer to underwrite the exposure
first before providing the coverage.
CG 21 44 Limitation of Coverage to Designated
Premises or Projects
This endorsement’s purpose is to limit coverage to the premises
or project(s) specifically designated in the endorsement. A property
syndicate that purchases real estate or constructs condominium
projects may desire to cover each such location separately,
particularly if the membership varies by project. It is common, for
example, for a general partnership to have different limited
partnership participation. Note that coverage under this endorsement
is limited to the premises as described and operations necessary or
incidental to those premises. While this limitation is similar to the
coverage that once was offered by the Owners, Landlords, and
Tenants (OL&T) policy, as well as Manufacturers and Contractors
(M&C) policy, the coverage of this endorsement is broader, since itdoes not exclude the products-completed operations hazard, unlike
the OL&T and M&C policies.
Nonetheless, this endorsement still is undesirable for the same
reasons as noted with respect to endorsement CG 21 00, Exclusion
—All Hazards in Connection with Designated Premises. In other
words, if an individual or business qualifies for the basic provisions of
the CGL policy, this protection of the policy should be provided. On
the other hand, if the risk does not qualify for anything other than a
stripped down version of the CGL policy or a policy with this limitation
attached, it would be in the insurer’s best interest to decline the risk
altogether rather than being faced with a possible costly argument
later. Given the number of arguments generated by this endorsement,
the trade-off of premium versus potential argument is simply not
worth it. The excess and surplus lines market approach of using an
OL&T policy is a much better way to handle the situation. This latter
method at least serves as a “red flag” that unless precautions are
taken in light of coverage limitations, problems can be expected—as
attested to by many cases that have sought resolution from the
courts over the years.
A revision that will not go into effect until April, 2017 contains
several changes to the previous version of the form, resulting in a
reduction of coverage. This revision is in response to a court case
that involved an injury that happened at a location that was not listed
in the Schedule, but that occurred because of “use” of a location
listed in the Schedule. In order to close this loophole, ISO made
revisions to the Coverage A, Coverage B, and Coverage C sections
of the endorsement. The revisions address the location where
Coverage for Bodily Injury and Property Damage, “bodily injury” or
“property damage” must occur, coverage for Personal and
Advertising Injury, where certain location based enumerated offenses
must be committed, and Coverage for Medical Payments, where
“bodily injury” must occur. The court case was C. Brewer and Co.,Ltd. v. Marine Indem. Ins. Co. of America., 135 Haw. P.3d 163, 170
(2015).
CG 21 45 Exclusion—Damage to Premises Rented to
You
Prior to the 1998 CGL policy revisions, this endorsement was
titled Exclusion—Fire Damage Legal Liability. It was designed to
eliminate the fire legal liability coverage that is automatically provided
under the policy, subject to a basic limit of $100,000. The
endorsement’s name was changed with the 1998 amendments to
reflect the title of coverage being provided within the basic policy
provisions. Specifically, an exception to exclusion j., Damage to
Property, was made to provide additional coverage for damage to
premises rented to the named insured on a short-term basis. The
particulars concerning this change were explained in more depth in
Chapter 1 in relation to exclusion j.
The prior exclusionary endorsement was sufficient to exclude fire
damage legal liability coverage. But with the additional coverage for
damage to premises rented to the named insured on a short-term
basis, the endorsement had to be revised in 1998 so as to
encompass the additional coverage when this exclusion is issued.
CG 21 46 Exclusion—Abuse or Molestation Exclusion
This endorsement is utilized by underwriters in those instances
where the possibility of abuse and molestation is relatively high, such
as day care centers, preschool institutions, juvenile centers, and
municipalities. When attached to the CGL policy, coverage is
excluded for bodily injury, property damage, personal injury, and
advertising injury arising out of the two exposures as noted in the
endorsement. Sometimes a lawsuit will be filed against an employer
because of its negligent investigation, employment, and/or supervisionof an alleged offender. If this should occur, it is the endorsement’s
purpose to exclude any protection that may be sought here as well.
The main purpose of this endorsement is to ensure that the CGL form
is not used as a vehicle to provide insurance coverage for the criminal
activities of abuse or molestation.
This endorsement was amended in 1993 by numbering and
lettering the endorsement to make it consistent with other CGL
forms, and in 1998 when the form made the switch from “personal
injury” to “personal and advertising injury.” Also, the endorsement now
has lead-in language to clarify which section of the CGL form is
modified by this wording.
CG 21 47 Employment Related Practices Exclusion
In 1988, Insurance Services Office proposed a new exclusion in
CGL coverage forms relating to employment discrimination and
similar offenses. While ISO described the new exclusion as a
clarification, the Risk and Insurance Management Society and other
parties opposed the change. Following public hearings by the NAIC
and meetings between ISO and NAIC, ISO agreed not to add this
exclusion to the coverage forms but, instead, to make the exclusion
available by endorsement.
This exclusion can be viewed as an extension of employer’s
liability exclusion e. because it appears to be an insurer defense
against attempts by insureds to secure coverage under their CGL
policies for damages arising from wrongful terminations and other
employment-related practices that have proliferated over the past
several years. Before the exclusionary endorsement is discussed, it is
worthwhile to explain its probable rationale.
Those who maintain that damages against employers because of
wrongful termination and related practices are covered by CGLinsurance depend mainly on three arguments: (1) emotional distress,
which is the commonly alleged result, is deemed to be bodily injury or
sickness; (2) the alleged offense is not subject to employer’s liability
exclusion e. because emotional distress or other resulting injury
manifests after employment has been terminated, rather than during
the course of employment; and, (3) although the policy excludes
intentional injury, it does not exclude injury resulting from an intentional
act if the insured did not intend to cause injury. Thus, unless the
insurer can prove without a doubt that the employer had the
conscious intention to cause the injury that resulted, the employer’s
CGL policy should cover such claim or suit.
In certain jurisdictions, insurers have been successful in denying
coverage despite the absence of any employment related exclusion
for the following reasons. First, emotional distress is not considered
to be bodily injury, as that term is defined in the policy. To constitute
bodily injury, there must be some injury to the human body of a
physical nature. See, for example, St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance
Company v. Campbell County School District No. 1, 612 F. Supp.
285 (D.Wyo.1985) and Rolette County v. Western Casualty & Surety
Co., 452 F. Supp. 125 (D.N.D. 1978). Second, the alleged emotional
distress is not deemed to be caused by an occurrence because the
result is not an accident. See E-Z Loader Boat Trailers, Inc. v.
Travelers Indemnity Co., 726 P.2d 439 (Wash. 1986).
The weakness in the defense of the insurers is that employer’s
liability exclusion e. confines itself to bodily injury that arises “out of
and during the course of employment.” Endorsement CG 21 47
apparently is designed to combat that weakness. It eliminates
coverage for:
“Bodily injury” arising out of any:
(1)    Refusal to employ;(2)    Termination of employment;
(3)    Coercion, demotion, evaluation, reassignment, discipline,
defamation, harassment, humiliation, discrimination or other
employment-related practices, policies, acts or omissions;
or
(4)    Consequential “bodily injury” as a result of (1) through (3)
above.
This exclusion applies whether the insured may be held liable as
an employer or in any other capacity and to any other obligation to
share damages with or to repay someone else who must pay
damages because of the injury. Also, if attached to the occurrence or
claims-made forms, this exclusion affects both Coverages A and B.
While use of this exclusionary endorsement will depend on
underwriting discretion, its probable use is in those jurisdictions where
the courts have ruled for coverage.
The 1993 edition of this endorsement has been numbered and
lettered to track with other CGL forms; also, both the bodily injury
(Coverage A) and personal injury (Coverage B) paragraphs have
been amended to state that the injury excluded is to the person who
has been wronged, or to that person’s spouse, child, parent, brother,
or sister. Finally, the consequential injury language of this
endorsement was revised to be consistent with the language in the
employer’s liability exclusion of the CGL forms.
Both this endorsement and CG 29 51 (for use with the Owners
and Contractors Protective Liability and Pollution Liability coverage
parts) were revised in 2007 in light of two court cases that, according
to ISO, required it to reinforce what is intended to be excluded.
The first case is Peterborough Oil Company v. Great American
Insurance Co., 397 F. Supp. 2d 230 (D. Mass. 2005). This case dealtwith the malicious prosecution of a former employee. The significance
of this case was that coverage was held to apply despite an
employment-related practices exclusion, because the phrase
“employment-related act or omission,” as used in the exclusion, did
not mention malicious prosecution, which was a covered offense
under personal and advertising injury coverage. In light of this case,
both of the aforementioned endorsements now specifically refer to
malicious prosecution as another one of the listed employment-
related practices, policies, acts or omissions considered to be
excluded.
The second case is Owners Insurance Co. v. Clayton, 614 S.E.
2d 611 (S.C. 2005). This case held that an exclusion for employment-
related practices was not applicable to postemployment situations
where the alleged injury did not arise out of an employment-related
scenario, but instead out of defamatory comments made after the
employee was terminated. As a result of this case, both of the above
endorsements have been changed to state that the exclusion applies
whether the injury-causing event takes place before, during, or after
employment of that person.
CG 21 48 Coverage B—Personal Injury Liability Only
(Advertising Injury Liability Not Included) (Claims-Made
Version)
Formerly titled “Exclusion—Advertising Injury,” this endorsement is
the claims-made counterpart to endorsement CG 21 40, which is
used with the occurrence form. Both endorsements were withdrawn
by ISO as part of the 1998 CGL revision.
CG 21 50 Amendment of Liquor Liability Exclusion
This endorsement is an alternative to the liquor liability exclusion
contained in the CGL coverage forms. The endorsement is describedin Chapter 1 in connection with exclusion c under coverage A of the
CGL form.
The built-in liquor exclusions of the two CGL Coverage Forms are
as broad as they can be, but the issuance of standard endorsements
is also available. Currently Amendment Of Liquor Liability Exclusion
Endorsement CG 21 50, when issued, modifies the coverage part’s
liquor exclusion by extending the exclusion to apply to businesses
which regularly serve alcoholic beverages, whether or not a profit is
derived. (For informational purposes, Amendment Of Liquor Liability
CG 29 52 is similar to the preceding endorsement CG 21 50, except
that it applies to the Products/Completed Operations Liability
Coverage Part.)
Two other optional exclusionary endorsements are Amendment Of
Liquor Liability—E xception For Scheduled Activities CG 21 51 and
CG 29 53. (The latter is similar to the CG 21 51, except that it
applies to the Products/Completed Operations Liability Coverage
Part.) When these endorsements are issued, the exclusion for liquor
makes an exception for the scheduled premises or activities. The
word “premises” in the endorsement titles is newly added with the
2013 revisions.
All four endorsements are also amended by all of the exclusionary
additions introduced with the 2013 revision. Thus, added to these
endorsements are the following changes: (1) The exclusion will also
apply if one of the reasons for which any insured may be liable for
bodily injury or property damage is causing or contributing to the
intoxication of any person, including causing or contributing to the
intoxication of any person because alcoholic beverages were
permitted to be brought on the named insured’s premises for
consumption thereon; (2) The exclusion applies even if the claims
against any insured allege the negligence or wrongdoing in the
supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others; and
providing or failing to provide transportation with respect to anyperson that may be under the influence of alcohol—if the occurrence
which caused the bodily injury or property damage involved that which
is involved in Paragraphs (1), (2), (3) of exclusion c (i.e., selling to a
minor or in violation of a Dram Shop Act); and (3) all four of the above
endorsements also are amended to read as precluding the BYOB
exposure (that is, the exclusion will apply if an insured permits any
person to bring any alcoholic beverages on the named insured’s
premises for consumption thereon).
From ISO’s perspective, the first change is considered a
restriction, the second one a clarification, and the third one a
restriction.
CG 21 51 Amendment of Liquor Liability Exclusion—
Exception for Scheduled Activities
This endorsement contains the exclusion expressed in
endorsement CG 21 50 but states that the exclusion does not apply
to any event specified in the endorsement.
CG 21 52 Exclusion—Financial Services
This endorsement, intended for use with CGL insurance for
financial institutions, was introduced with the 1996 CGL revisions. Its
purpose is to exclude coverage (under Coverage A or Coverage B)
for bodily injury, property damage, personal injury, or advertising
injury resulting from the insured’s rendering of or failure to render any
of a long list of financial services.
CG 21 53 Exclusion—Designated Ongoing Operations
This endorsement was introduced with the 1996 CGL revisions.
Its purpose is to exclude bodily injury or property damage arising out
of ongoing operations described in the endorsement schedule. Asituation when this endorsement might be appropriate is when a
particular work project is being covered under a separate CGL policy.
CG 21 54 Exclusion—Designated Operations Covered
by a Consolidated (Wrap-Up) Insurance Program
Introduced in the 1996 CGL revisions, this endorsement excludes
liability for bodily injury and property damage arising out of either
ongoing operations or products and completed operations at a
specified project location when coverage for the project is being
provided under a consolidated or “wrap-up” program. (Even though
there may be some potential problems with it, it might be advisable
for an insured to seek the issuance of endorsement CG 21 31 Limited
Exclusion—Designated Operations Covered by a Consolidated
(Wrap-Up) Insurance Program.)
CG 21 56 Exclusion—Funeral Services
ISO introduced this endorsement with the 1997 CGL changes.
The exclusion contained in the current endorsement was formerly a
part of endorsement CG 21 16, Exclusion—Designated Professional
Services. However, this endorsement and the three separate
exclusionary endorsements mentioned next were developed to clarify
specifically the type of professional services being excluded.
When issued, endorsement CG 21 56 excludes liability arising out
of errors or omissions arising out of the handling, embalming,
disposal, burial, cremation, or disinterment of dead bodies. The
endorsement is mandatory for cemeteries, crematories, funeral
homes, chapels, and mausoleums. A potential problem for insurers
here is that the endorsement does not specifically mention that
liability arising out of negligent acts also is not covered.
CG 21 57 Exclusion—Counseling ServicesThis is another one of the exclusions that formed a part of
endorsement CG 21 16, and as of 1997 is a separate endorsement.
It excludes liability arising out of advisory services or counseling with
respect to such things as mental health, crisis prevention, social
services, and kindred subjects. This endorsement is mandatory for
mission, settlement or halfway house risks.
CG 21 58 Exclusion—Professional Veterinarian Services
The third endorsement that formerly was included within CG 21 16
is endorsement CG 21 58, mandatory for veterinarian or veterinary
hospital risks. It excludes three categories of risks:
•    diagnostic testing, surgical or dental procedures used for the
prevention, detection or treatment of any sickness, disease,
condition or injury in animals, including the furnishing or
prescription of drugs or medical, dental or surgical supplies;
•    the rendering or failure to render any advice or instruction on
health maintenance; and
•    errors or omissions in the handling or treatment of dead
animals.
CG 21 59 Exclusion—Diagnostic Testing Laboratories
Under ISO rules, this endorsement is mandatory for medical or X-
ray laboratories. It excludes bodily injury, property damage, or
personal and advertising injury arising out of medical or diagnostic
testing and procedures used for the detection, diagnosis, or
treatment of any sickness, disease, or injury; or for the evaluation of
a patient’s response to treatment. The endorsement also excludes
injury or damage arising out of the reporting of or reliance upon the
results of the services described above.CG 21 60 Exclusion—Year 2000 Computer-Related and
Other Electronic Problems
CG 21 61 Exclusion—Year 2000 Computer-Related and
Other Electronic Problems—Products/Completed
Operations
CG 21 62 Exclusion—Year 2000 Computer-Related and
Other Electronic Problems—With Exception for Bodily
Injury on Your Premises
CG 21 63 Year 2000 Computer-Related and Other
Electronic Problems—Exclusion of Specified Coverages
for Designated Locations, Operations, Products, or
Services
CG 21 64 Year 2000 Computer-Related and Other
Electronic Problems—Exclusion of Specified Coverages
for Designated Products or Completed Operations
ISO developed the above five exclusionary endorsements in
anticipation of possibly catastrophic losses that could have occurred
on January 1, 2000 if computers had failed to recognize the year
2000. Although catastrophic losses did not occur, ISO had not
withdrawn the endorsements as of its recent CGL revision.
CG 21 66 Exclusion—Volunteer Workers
This endorsement was introduced by ISO with its 2001 revisions
in order to provide a means by which to remove volunteer workers as
insureds from the CGL policy now that volunteer workers are
automatically included in the basic provisions as of the 2001 revisions.When the 2001 version of this endorsement is issued, however,
the employer still may have nonownership liability coverage under the
CGL policy for aircraft, auto, and watercraft operated by volunteer
workers. The reason is that the aircraft, auto, or watercraft exclusion
is applicable to insureds. But when volunteers are excluded, they are
no longer insureds, meaning that the foregoing exclusion would not
apply to the extent any of those vehicles were to be operated by a
volunteer. To overcome this problem, the 2004 revision of CG 21 66
adds new language to the exclusion to indicate that liability arising out
of the ownership, maintenance, or entrustment to others of any
aircraft, auto, or watercraft operated by volunteer workers of the
named insured is excluded.
This endorsement has been shown incorrectly to also be
applicable to the products and completed operations liability coverage
part. Reference to that coverage part was eliminated as part of the
2004 revisions.
CG 21 67 Fungi or Bacteria Exclusion
This endorsement, introduced in 2002, eliminates coverage for
bodily injury, property damage, and personal and advertising injury
that would not have occurred, in whole or in part, but for the actual,
alleged, or threatened inhalation of, ingestion of, contact with,
exposure to, existence of, or presence of any fungi or bacteria on or
within a building or structure. Also not covered is any loss, cost, or
expenses in having to abate, test, monitor, etc., the effects of fungi or
bacteria by any insured or by any other person or entity. Thus, the
costs incurred by the insured are excluded, as are the costs incurred
by others who then seek reimbursement from the insured.
This exclusion, however, is stated not to apply to any fungi or
bacteria on or contained in a good or product intended for
consumption. The 2004 revision of CG 21 67 added the word bodilyto precede the word consumption. As a result of this amendment, the
exclusion does not apply to any fungi or bacteria on or contained in a
good or product intended for bodily consumption.
Terrorism Endorsement Options
The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act (TRIA) is a program within the
Department of the Treasury in which the Federal Government will
share losses with the insurance industry from terrorists’ attacks.
Participation of the Federal Government is activated when the
Secretary of the Treasury certifies an act of terrorism committed by
individuals acting on behalf of any foreign interest, provided the TRIA
results in aggregate losses in excess of the amount stated in the Act.
Insofar as insured losses from a certified act of terrorism, the
Federal Government will reimburse insurers for a percentage of
losses, stated in the Act, in excess of the insurer’s retention, based
on a specified percentage of the insurer’s earned premium for the
year preceding the loss. Insured losses covered by the program are
capped at $100 billion per year, unless action of Congress changes
that amount. All insurers providing general liability insurance are
required to participate in this program. For all new and renewal
business, insurers must make available to insureds coverage for
losses caused by certified acts of terrorism. The insurer also must
disclose to the policyholder the premium for loses covered and the
Federal share of compensation for such losses at the time of offer,
purchase and renewal of the policy.
Prior to January 2015 in order to decide whether or not an act
was an act of terrorism pursuant to the Terrorism Risk Insurance Act,
the Secretary of the Treasury was required to confer with the
Secretary of State and the United States Attorney General. The
January 2015 revision of the Terrorism Risk Endorsements removed
the Secretary of State from the certification decision and provided
that the Secretary of the Treasury will consult with the Secretary of
Homeland Security and the United States Attorney General, whendeciding whether or not an act is an act of terrorism pursuant to the
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act.
In 2015 several of the Terrorism Risk Endorsements were
updated to include rephrased language that replaced language that
had previously been reflected within the endorsements, but proved to
be unclear when being used in practice. The final provision of the
following terrorism endorsements provides that the terms and
limitations, or inapplicability or omission of a terrorism exclusion does
not create coverage for injury or damage that is otherwise excluded.
Some revisions were made to the Limits of Insurance section of the
terrorism endorsements, specifying that the limit shown in the
Schedule is the most that will be paid for damages under Coverages
A, B, and C, because of all bodily injury, property damage, and
personal and advertising injury arising out of all certified acts of
terrorism. The wording of the aggregate limit provisions was revised
in order to more closely track the limit of insurance provisions in
related coverage forms. The alterations result in no material change
in the application of the aggregate limit.
These revisions affected the following terrorism endorsements:
•    Exclusion of Certified Acts of Terrorism, CG 21 73
•    Exclusion of Certified Acts of Terrorism and Exclusion of
Other Acts of Terrorism Committed Outside of the United
States, CG 21 75
•    Exclusion of Punitive Damages Related to a Certified Act of
Terrorism, CG 21 76
•    Certified Acts of Terrorism Aggregate Limit; Cap on Losses
from Certified Acts of Terrorism, CG 21 80•    Conditional Exclusion of Terrorism (Relating to Disposition of
Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act), CG 21 87
•    Conditional Exclusion of Terrorism Involving Nuclear,
Biological or Chemical Terrorism (Relating to Disposition of
Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act), CG 21 88
•    Conditional Limitation of Coverage for Terrorism on an
Annual Aggregate Basis (Relating to Disposition of Federal
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act), CG 21 89
The following consists of a brief description of all of the available
endorsements pertaining to terrorism coverage under the CGL.
Readers are urged to refer to the endorsements to determine the
entire agreement.
CG 21 70 CAP On Losses from Certified Acts of
Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008.
When coverage for certified acts of terrorism is to be provided, this
endorsement provides coverage for both certified acts of terrorism
and other acts of terrorism, provided that the insurer will not pay any
amount for injury or damage for any certified act of terrorism after the
amounts of all such events in a statutory period exceed the cap
provided by the Act.
CG 21 71 Exclusion of Other Acts of Terrorism
Committed Outside the United States; CAP On Losses
from Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008.
When coverage for certified acts of terrorism is to be provided, this
endorsement provides coverage for certified acts of terrorism,subject to the cap on liability and the underlying policy provisions, and
excludes other acts of terrorism, subject to a $25 million threshold,
with no dollar threshold on nuclear, biological or chemical events.
CG 21 73 Exclusion of Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008. It
is available when coverage is not to be provided or provided subject
to a specific limitation. When issued, it excludes coverage for certified
acts of terrorism but provides coverage for other acts, subject to
underlying policy provisions.
CG 21 75 Exclusion of Certified Acts of Terrorism and
Exclusion of Other Acts of Terrorism Committed
Outside the United States
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008. It
is available when coverage for certified acts of terrorism is not to be
provided. When issued, it excludes all losses arising out of certified
acts of terrorism and other acts of terrorism, subject to a $25 million
threshold and with no dollar threshold on nuclear, biological or
chemical events.
CG 21 76 Exclusion of Punitive Damages Related to a
Certified Act of Terrorism
This endorsement was modified in 2008. When this endorsement
is issued, the policy does not apply to terrorism punitive damages;
that is, damages arising directly or indirectly, out of a “certified act of
terrorism,” as defined in the endorsement, that are awarded as
punitive damages.CG 21 77 Exception to Terrorism Exclusion For
Certified Acts of Terrorism; CAP On Losses From
Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002, and withdrawn by ISO
in January of 2015. When TRIA was introduced, it voided all
exclusions of terrorism that might have been in effect that were
required to be offered by TRIA. If an insured decides to purchase
insurance, this endorsement when attached to the CGL coverage
form restored terrorism coverage, as prescribed by TRIA but leaves
undisturbed any terrorism exclusion relating to noncertified acts of
terrorism.
CG 21 78 Removal of Terrorism Exclusion; CAP On
Losses From Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002, and withdrawn by ISO
in January of 2015. It is used when an insured chooses to purchase
terrorism insurance but whose CGL policy currently is subject to a
terrorism exclusion. When this endorsement is issued, it makes clear
that any existing terrorism exclusion does not apply. This
endorsement also includes a provision stating that an insurer may be
relieved of its obligation to pay covered losses once the $100 billion
aggregate for a calendar year has been exceeded.
CG 21 80 Certified Acts of Terrorism Aggregate Limit;
CAP On Losses From Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008.
This endorsement is to be issued when coverage is to be provided for
certified acts of terrorism, subject to the aggregate limit and
coverage for other acts of terrorism, subject to full policy limits.
Coverage, however, is subject to the cap on liability for losses and
subject to underlying policy provisions.CG 21 84 Exclusion of Certified Nuclear, Biological,
Chemical or Radiological Acts of Terrorism; CAP On
Losses From Certified Acts of Terrorism
This endorsement was introduced in 2002 and modified in 2008. It
is issued to exclude coverage for losses arising out of a certified act
of terrorism that involves nuclear, biological or chemical materials but
provides coverage for other acts of terrorism, subject to underlying
policy provisions.
CG 21 86 Exclusion—Exterior Insulation Finish Systems
This optional endorsement introduced with the 2004 revisions will
likely be attached to every CGL policy issued to a contractor.
Commonly referred to in short as EIFS, this finish is an exterior
building finish composed of layers of plywood, insulation board,
reinforcing mesh, base, and finish coats. Its end product has the
appearance of stucco or stone in any number of colors, and is
intended to make the building or structure more energy efficient. It is
a system developed in Europe in the 1950s and was first introduced
for use in the United States in the mid-1970s.
The installation requires experienced, manufacturer-trained
specialists, but this apparently has not been the case in all instances.
Or, contractors have not necessarily been properly trained to perform
quality work on the remaining portions of projects. Whatever the
situation, water intrusion into these systems has resulted in many
claims for construction defects as well as damage to other property.
(For purposes of this 2004 filing, endorsements also will be
available for use with the products and completed operations liability
coverage form, and the owners and contractors protective liability
coverage form.)CG 21 87 Conditional Exclusion of Terrorism (Relating
To Disposition of Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act)
This endorsement was introduced in 2007. Contemplating that
TRIA might not be extended or be substantially changed, this is one
of several endorsements insurers could use during the policy period
to define the extent to which terrorism insurance would otherwise
apply. This particular endorsement introduces a terrorism exclusion
that overrides all other coverage provisions relating to terrorism.
CG 21 88 Conditional Exclusion of Terrorism (Relating
To Disposition of Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act)
This conditional endorsement introduced in 2007 is issued to
exclude coverage for terrorism that involved nuclear, biological or
chemical materials. This would then leave intact any underlying
terrorism coverage not involving nuclear, biological or chemical
materials.
CG 21 89 Conditional Limitation of Coverage For
Terrorism On An Annual Aggregate Basis (Relating To
Disposition Of Federal Terrorism Risk Insurance Act)
The last of the conditional endorsements, also introduced in 2007,
this endorsement provides terrorism coverage, subject to an
aggregate limit and any underlying policy provisions.
The following three endorsement options are to be used when
policies become effective on or after the date when TRIA coverage
has terminated, or have become effective on or after the date when
an extension of TRIA has gone into effect, if the program was
extended with certain changes in terrorism coverage or increases in
insurer retention or participation in losses.CG 21 90 Exclusion of Terrorism
Modified in 2006, this endorsement when issued excludes
terrorism coverage.
CG 21 91 Exclusion of Terrorism Involving Nuclear,
Biological Or Chemical Terrorism
This endorsement was modified in 2006. It is issued to exclude
terrorism coverage involving nuclear, biological or chemical materials,
thereby leaving intact any terrorism coverage that does not affect
nuclear, biological or chemical materials.
CG 21 92 Limitation of Coverage For Terrorism On An
Annual Aggregate Basis
Modified in 2006, this endorsement is issued to provide terrorism
coverage, subject to an aggregate limit and any underlying policy
provisions.
CG 21 93 Extended Reporting Period for Terrorism
Coverage
This endorsement was introduced in 2004. When condition
exclusion endorsement CG 21 87 or 21 88 is issued to a CGL policy
written on a claims-made basis, it is necessary to also attach this
endorsement CG 21 93. In doing so, the endorsement provides an
extended reporting period of five years from the date the conditional
exclusion goes into effect, for claims arising out of a terrorism
incident occurring prior to the date the conditional exclusion became
effective. This endorsement is not to be issued if the policy is subject
to endorsement CG 21 75.CG 21 96 Exclusion—Silica or Silica-Related Dust
This endorsement was introduced by ISO in 2004 to be effective
in March, 2005 on a voluntary basis to exclude bodily injury, property
damage, and personal and advertising injury arising out of silica or
silica-related dust. Also excluded are the losses, costs, and expenses
arising in whole or in part out of the abating, testing for, monitoring,
cleaning up, removing, containing, treating, etc., of silica or silica-
related dust. Although once viewed solely as an occupational hazard,
silica-related lawsuits are now said to be filed against manufacturers,
distributors, and vendors of products containing silica.
CG 21 97 Abuse or Molestation Exclusion—Specified
Professional Services
Prior to 2007, the one endorsement available to exclude abuse or
molestation of a person while in the care, custody or control of any
insured was Abuse or Molestation Exclusion CG 21 46. This
endorsement, CG 21 97, was introduced in 2007 in order to give
underwriters another tool in which to handle the exclusion for abuse
or molestation by certain specified professionals. An example could
be a hotel’s spa that offers body massages and other services for a
charge. For a spa, however, it would also be necessary to issue the
Professional Liability Exclusion—Spas or Personal Enhancement
Facilities, CG 22 90. This endorsement (22 90) alone would not be
sufficient because abuse or molestation would not likely be
considered a professional service, unless specifically addressed as it
is with endorsement CG 21 97.
According to ISO, this new endorsement CG 21 97 is less
restrictive than the previous endorsement CG 21 97 because when
CG 21 97 is issued, it would permit coverage for professional
services not specifically described.Endorsements for Certain Types of Risks
Many insureds are confronted with certain types of risks that may
require special treatment. The following endorsements were
developed by ISO to be used with policies covering these risks.
CG 22 24 Exclusion—Inspection, Appraisal, and Survey
Companies
This endorsement is designed to preclude coverage against
claims or suits that allege bodily injury, property damage, personal
injury, or advertising injury arising from the rendering of or failure to
render professional services of the type of service-related companies
described above. The rationale is that these exposures should be
covered by professional liability policies. Unfortunately, the E&O-type
policies that are available for these types of businesses are limited to
liability coverage for errors or omissions that result in economic
damages that are not based on injury or damage. In fact, bodily
injury, property damage, personal injury, and advertising injury usually
are excluded from these E&O policies. Therefore, when this
endorsement is attached, it can create a gap for which protection
may not otherwise be available.
CG 22 27 Exclusion—Bodily Injury to Railroad
Passengers
This exclusionary endorsement is intended to preclude all
coverage because of bodily injury to a person while on, entering into,
or alighting from, a passenger train.
CG 22 28 Exclusion—Travel Agency Tours (Limitation of
Coverage)This endorsement is intended for travel agencies whose services
extend beyond the United States, its territories and possessions,
Puerto Rico, and Canada. The endorsement was revised in 2004 to
correctly refer to the appropriate coverage territory definition that
does not apply. The effect is to bar coverage if the injury or damage
arises out of the activities of a person while outside the United
States, its territories, possessions, Puerto Rico, or Canada.
CG 22 29 Exclusion—Property Entrusted
This endorsement is designed for security and patrol agencies
and warehouses, which commonly are entrusted with property of
others. The exclusion, which supplements the care, custody, or
control exclusion, eliminates coverage to property of others that is
entrusted to the named insured for safekeeping or to property on
premises owned or rented to the named insured. The exclusion does
not apply when property of others is located on premises of others.
CG 22 30 Exclusion—Corporal Punishment
This endorsement, frequently added to policies covering schools,
excludes coverage for bodily injury, property damage, personal injury,
or advertising injury to any student or pupil arising out of any corporal
punishment administered by or at the direction of any insured. If the
insurer is willing to cover corporal punishment, coverage can be
provided by attaching endorsement CG 22 67, Corporal Punishment.
The 1993 amendment to this endorsement changed reference in
the exclusionary language from “any student or pupil” to “your
student” to better express that the exclusion is intended to apply to
the named insured’s students.
CG 22 31 Exclusion—Riot, Civil Commotion, or Mob
Action (Governmental Subdivisions)This endorsement is designed to exclude injury and damage
arising from riots and civil commotion that may take place from time
to time within the municipalities or other governmental subdivisions
throughout the United States. In some cases, depending on the law of
the jurisdiction, the governmental subdivision is not liable for resulting
injury or damage that occurs during riots or during periods when
preventative measures are taken. However, most insurers
automatically attach this endorsement whenever they provide liability
insurance for governmental subdivisions.
CG 22 32 Exclusion—Professional Services—Blood
Banks
The purpose of this exclusionary endorsement is to prevent the
granting of liability coverage for claims or suits that should be covered
by medical professional policies. When this endorsement is attached
to the CGL policy, it excludes bodily injury and property damage
arising out of the rendering of or failure to render professional
services in connection with the making of a blood donation, or in the
handling or distributing of the blood product by the named insured.
This endorsement also excludes the liability of any insured for acts or
omissions as a doctor of medicine.
This endorsement was amended in 1998 to be more consistent
with the coverage provided by the Blood Banks Professional Liability
Coverage Form (PR 00 07) introduced by ISO in 1997. This
endorsement is said to more closely mirror the language of the
professional liability trigger of a “medical incident” as defined in the
coverage form.
CG 22 33 Exclusion—Testing or Consulting Errors and
OmissionsThis is an optional endorsement that is intended to exclude liability
arising out of an error, omission, defect, or deficiency of any test,
evaluation, consultation or advice performed or given by or on behalf
of any insured, including the reporting of or reliance upon any such
test or evaluation.
An important point to note here is that the terms “error” and
“omission” have been held not to encompass “negligence.” See for
example Aitchison v. Founders Ins. Co., 333 P.2d 178 (Cal. App.
1958). Thus, an allegation of injury or damage because of negligence
might be covered despite this endorsement.
CG 22 34 Exclusion—Construction Management Errors
and Omissions
A general contractor can be defined as the person or entity with
responsibility and control over the means, methods, sequences and
techniques of the work in general, including the coordination and
supervision of the work of subcontractors. Some general contractors
also may perform some of the work. Although a general contractor
does not have to be a professional or to perform work considered to
be of a professional nature, it is common to find general contractors
with professionals on staff, or who are qualified to, and in fact,
function as construction managers.
The term “construction management” is generally taken to
encompass the activities undertaken by a construction manager
whose professional services are engaged by the project owner to
coordinate and manage the entire project from start to finish. The
activities of a construction manager can vary widely, depending on
the nature of the project and the owner’s needs. The American
Institute of Architects’ agreement between the project owner and
construction manager describes the scope of the construction
manager’s work to include (1) basic services, (2) construction phaseadministrative services, (3) additional services, (4) contingent
additional services, (5) optional additional services. With knowledge
and expertise in the means, and methods of construction, labor,
materials and the ability to direct, work with, and make decisions over
the entire project, including design, the general objective of the
construction manager is to help produce a quality project, with as little
delay as possible, and at the least possible cost.
The endorsement is designed for contractors who are involved in
construction management such as design-build projects. The fact that
a contractor’s professional liability policy is likely to be written by a
different insurer than the one that writes the contractor’s general
liability policy means there may be a gray area between the two
policies. In fact, this problem confronts most businesses that offer
professional services.
Despite its title, this endorsement does not limit the exclusion of
bodily injury, property damage, personal injury, or advertising injury to
errors and omissions. Coverage is flatly excluded if such injury or
damage arises from any of the various activities noted in the
endorsement. However, excepted from this exclusion, and therefore
covered, is bodily injury and property damage due to construction or
demolition work done by the named insured or its employees or
subcontractors, subject to other policy exclusions.
The 1993 version of this endorsement includes reference to
“employee,” as a defined term. This change also was made because
the exclusion does not apply to bodily injury or property damage due
to construction or demolition work by the named insured or its
employees.
In light of the 2001 CGL policy amendment that expands the
definition of employee to include volunteers, what applies here to
employees also applies to volunteers.CG 22 36 Exclusion—Products and Professional
Services (Druggists)
This endorsement is intended to exclude the kind of coverage that
normally is provided by a druggists liability policy. In fact, coverage
for this excluded exposure can be brought back into the CGL form
through the attachment of endorsement CG 22 69, if the insurer is
willing to do so and is not otherwise precluded from offering such
insurance. There is, of course, a distinct advantage to obtaining both
professional and general liability insurance from the same insurer.
The 1993 change to this endorsement changed the phrase
“professional services” to “professional health care services” in order
to emphasize the nature of services intended to be excluded.
CG 22 37 Exclusion—Products and Professional
Services (Optical and Hearing Aid Establishments)
This endorsement is comparable in purpose to the previous one
dealing with druggists. If coverage is desired for this exposure in
conjunction with the CGL policy, it is necessary to attach CG 22 65,
Optical and Hearing Aid Establishments.
The 1993 change to this endorsement is identical to the change
noted in the discussion of endorsement CG 22 36.
Following the introduction by ISO of the Optometrists Professional
Liability Coverage Form in 1997, it became necessary, with the 1998
CGL policy revisions, to amend this endorsement, CG 22 37, so that
it would more closely correspond to the products liability exclusion of
the Optometrists coverage form.
CG 22 38 Exclusion—Fiduciary or Representative
Liability of Financial InstitutionsUntil revised in 1996, this endorsement was titled “Exclusion—
Financial Institutions.” The exclusion may be attached when a bank or
other financial institution is covered by the CGL policy. The exclusion
is designed to avoid covering liability in connection with property in
which the named insured is acting in a fiduciary or representative
capacity. According to Black’s Law Dictionary, 5th edition, a fiduciary
is a person or entity who handles money or property which is not his
or her own for the benefit of others. If coverage is desired for this
exposure under the CGL policy, it is necessary to add endorsement
CG 24 11, Fiduciaries—F iduciary Interest.
CG 22 39 Exclusion—Camp or Campground
This endorsement is designed to exclude the medical professional
liability exposure of any camp or campground that owns or operates
an infirmary with facilities for lodging and treatment. If the camp or
campground does not maintain such a medical facility, the named
insured should at least have protection under its CGL policy against
its vicarious liability that could be imputed because of the acts of
medical professionals in administering aid at the time of injury. The
specific provision which should provide this protection to the named
insured is under paragraph 2.a. (1) (d) of the Who Is an Insured
provision of the CGL policy. This provision is commonly referred to as
incidental medical malpractice coverage.
Note also that this endorsement specifically excludes the payment
of medical expenses under Coverage C for bodily injury to any
camper. Accident insurance is a better alternative.
In addition to numbering and lettering this endorsement to make it
more consistent with other CGL forms, the 1993 revision made two
additional changes. First, the meaning of “health service or treatment”
coverage has been expanded to include therapeutic service, and
advice and instruction. Second, reference to “cosmetic or tonsorialservice or treatment” has been replaced with the following: “service,
treatment, advice, or instruction for the purpose of appearance or
skin enhancement, hair removal or replacement, or personal
grooming.”
CG 22 40 Exclusion—Medical Payments to Children
(Day Care Centers)
Since the activities of children at day care centers commonly can
result in bodily injury, this endorsement is designed to exclude the
payment of such expenses under Coverage C. Accident insurance is
a better alternative. However, if bodily injury is serious enough to
prompt a claim or lawsuit for damages, Coverage A should apply
subject to any exclusions or limitations of the CGL policy as issued.
CG 22 41 Exclusion—Housing Projects Sites
This endorsement excludes buildings that exist on the site of a
proposed housing authority at the time of their acquisition by a
housing authority or that are to be demolished. A 1993 revision
modified the exclusion to apply solely to bodily injury and property
damage because neither personal injury nor advertising injury is of
any concern with regard to vacant buildings or buildings in the course
of demolition.
With the 2001 amendments, this endorsement was further
amended to make the exclusion contingent on the condition that bodily
injury or property damage occur during the period of vacancy
preceding demolition of the building or during that demolition.
CG 22 42 Exclusion—Existence or Maintenance of
Streets, Roads, Highways, or BridgesThis exclusion commonly is added to the CGL policy of a
municipality or other governmental subdivision unless coverage is
desired. In fact, the insurance rating basis of total operating
expenditures does not take into consideration this exposure dealing
with the existence hazards of streets, roads and bridges, as well as
their maintenance. When coverage is desired, this exclusion is not
added and the classification is designated in the policy schedule. The
exposure unit is per mile.
CG 22 43 Exclusion—Engineers, Architects, or
Surveyors Professional Liability
The basic CGL policy provisions exclude, by exception to the
definition of insured contract, any liability under contract or agreement
that indemnifies an architect, engineer, or surveyor, or under which
the insured, if such a professional, assumes liability arising from its
rendering or failure to render professional services. When this
endorsement is attached, the policy also excludes all other
professional liability which could otherwise attach in the absence of
assumption of liability under contract or agreement. The purpose of
this endorsement, therefore, is to keep the insurer from paying a loss
that can be covered under a professional liability policy.
Since this is a kind of “clean sweep” of an exclusion, it should not
be combined when the CGL policy is modified with the exclusions of
the following two types of endorsements discussed later: CG 22 79
Exclusion—Contractors—P rofessional Liability, or CG 22 80 Limited
Exclusion—Contractors—P rofessional Liability. If combined, the result
can be an ambiguity and an argument with a result that is likely to be
unpredictable. (Unfortunately, while this caveat can be largely avoided
with the CGL policy, such is not commonly the case with umbrella
liability policies, which commonly are modified with endorsement CG
22 43 when written for construction work.)CG 22 44 Exclusion—Health or Cosmetic Services
The purpose of this endorsement is to prevent the insurer from
having to respond to damages for an exposure that is better covered
under some kind of professional liability policy. It is a general
endorsement and is earmarked for use when the CG 22 45 noted
below is not otherwise applicable.
With the 1993 revisions, the title of this endorsement was
changed to read: “Exclusion—Services Furnished by Health Care
Providers.” Other changes made were: (1) the words “advice or
instruction” were added to exclusion a.; (2) exclusion b., dealing with
“health service or treatment”, replaced such words with “health or
therapeutic service, treatment, advice, or instruction”; (3) reference in
exclusion c. to the phrase “cosmetic or tonsorial service or treatment”
was replaced with the phrase “service, treatment, advice, or
instruction for the purpose of appearance or skin enhancement, hair
removal or replacement, or personal grooming.”
CG 22 45 Exclusion—Specified Health or Cosmetic
Services
The purpose of this endorsement, like the one above, is to
preclude coverage against an exposure that requires special
insurance. However, this form is designed for operations as itemized:
cosmetic, ear piercing, tonsorial, massage, physiotherapy, chiropody,
hearing aid, optical, or optometrical service or treatment.
The title of this endorsement was changed in 1993 to read:
“Exclusion—Specified Therapeutic or Cosmetic Services.” Also, the
phrase “cosmetic, ear piercing, tonsorial, massage, physiotherapy,
chiropody, hearing aid, optical or optometrical service or treatment”
was replaced with the phrase “service, treatment, advice, orinstruction for the purpose of appearance or skin enhancement, hair
removal or replacement, personal grooming or therapy.”
CG 22 46 Exclusion—Rolling Stock—Railroad
Construction
The liability of railroads stemming from rolling stock (e.g., box
cars, tank cars, and flatbed cars) is specifically excluded by this
endorsement. However, by exception, coverage does apply for bodily
injury or property damage claims arising out of the movement of such
rolling stock while at a job site for purposes of construction or
maintenance operations performed by the railroad. The kind of
coverage that should be considered to cover damage to the rolling
stock itself stemming from work for railroads is a railroad protective
liability policy.
CG 22 47 Exclusion—Saline Substances Contamination
This endorsement generally is added to the CGL policy of an oil or
gas lease operator to exclude property damage resulting from the
“saline substance contamination hazard,” as defined in the
endorsement.
CG 22 48 Exclusion—Insurance and Related Operations
The intent behind this exclusionary endorsement is not readily
apparent. It excludes bodily injury, property damage, personal injury,
and advertising injury because of the activities as noted. However, the
natural result of such activities is economic damages that are not
based on such injury or damage. Thus, the apparent rationale for this
exclusion is to require the insurance company or related institution to
obtain an errors and omissions policy or a directors and officers
liability policy. Unfortunately, the latter two policies commonly exclude
liability because of bodily injury, property damage, personal injury,and advertising injury. The result is a potential gap in protection
whenever this endorsement is attached to a CGL policy of an
insurance company.
CG 22 50 Exclusion—Public Utilities—Failure to Supply
Water districts, water companies, gas dealers or distributors,
electric light companies or power cooperatives, municipalities that
provide utility services and other entities that supply similar services
to the public and business sector may have something in common. If
they purchase commercial general liability insurance, they are likely to
find their liability policies subject to this exclusion. When this
endorsement is attached to a CGL coverage form, this exclusion
attempts to serve at least two purposes.
The first purpose is to exclude damages and costs arising out of
an entity’s business decision to intentionally withhold (in whole or in
part) an adequate quantity of its product for use or consumption by
others. An example is when a utility voluntarily cuts back the amount
of power generated in order to conserve usage because of a
prolonged heat wave and drought. As a result, a manufacturer, for
example, may be unable to utilize all of its production facilities
resulting in loss of use of machinery.
The second purpose is to assure coverage, by exception to the
exclusions, for failure to supply, stemming from sudden and
accidental injury to tangible property owned or used by the entity
(supplier). For example, if the reason a water company must reduce
the supply of its product to users is because of the destruction of one
of its pumps by fire, resulting liability should be covered by the policy.
(As an aside, there apparently have been no problems over the
meaning of “sudden and accidental,” as used in this endorsement,
unlike the problems having to do with the pollution exclusion where
there are two schools of thought and argument: The first school ofthought is that reference to “sudden and accidental” conveys a
temporal meaning and the second school of thought is that it conveys
a nontemporal meaning, i.e., unexpected and unintended without
limitation as to time.
This endorsement is somewhat more liberal than many others
used by insurers. A more restrictive endorsement will not grant any
exception. All injury or damage arising out of complete or partial
failure to supply various utilities is flatly excluded.
CG 22 50 is being revised under the 2013 revisions to apply to the
failure to adequately supply biofuels. The reason for this change is
because one of the new manual classifications applies to Biofuels
Distributor Risks.
CG 22 51 Exclusion—Law Enforcement Activities
This endorsement excludes those kinds of claims or suits involving
bodily injury, property damage, or personal injury that can result from
law enforcement activities and are commonly covered by law
enforcement liability policies. However, this endorsement does not
exclude liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of
the named insured’s premises that are not ordinarily incidental to law
enforcement activities.
This is an important exception because law enforcement liability
policies limit their protection to liability arising from the rendering of or
failure to render law enforcement activities. Without this exception,
law enforcement officers could be without insurance protection for an
act or omission that is not deemed to be law enforcement related.
The 1993 amendment to the 1985 version of this endorsement
removed the paragraph that clarified that this exclusion did not apply
to liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of thenamed insured’s premises that are not ordinarily incidental to law
enforcement activities. However, this intent can still be inferred
because the 1993 version (and the current version) of the
endorsement excludes bodily injury, property damage, personal injury
and advertising injury arising out of any act or omission resulting from
law enforcement activities. A potential problem with this version is
that unnecessary time and expense may be required in order to infer
the coverage intent.
CG 22 52 Exclusion—Medical Payments Coverage
(Inmates, Patients, or Prisoners)
This exclusionary endorsement is required whenever a CGL policy
covers a health care facility, mission, settlement, halfway house, or
penal institution. When attached, the endorsement precludes under
Coverage C any expenses for bodily injury to any inmate, patient, or
prisoner who is being treated, cared for, detained, or imprisoned by
the facility designated in the endorsement. Also, this endorsement
precludes any medical payments for services performed by the
insured, its employees, or any person or organization under contract
to the named insured to provide such services.
The 1993 change to this endorsement placed quotes around the
word “employee,” in order to track with the definition of “employee” in
the 1993 CGL forms.
CG 22 53 Exclusion—Laundry and Dry Cleaning
Damage
This exclusion, which can be added to the CGL policy of a
laundromat, eliminates coverage for property damage to property
being laundered or dry cleaned arising out of the operation of any
self-service or coin-operated machine. Such losses might beconsidered a predictable business expense that is more economical
for the laundromat to retain.
CG 22 54 Exclusion—Logging and Lumbering
Operations
When the named insured is in the business of logging or
lumbering, its CGL policy, with this endorsement attached, is intended
to exclude property damage due to fire, or to property damage,
however caused, to any vehicle while being loaded or unloaded. The
fact that the term “vehicle” is not defined could conceivably mean that
it encompasses autos, mobile equipment, aircraft, and watercraft.
What a logger should seriously consider is a Loggers Property
Damage Liability policy. While these policies differ, some will cover
precisely what is excluded by this endorsement, along with a variety
of other coverages geared for the logger whose logging or sawmill
operations may damage the property of others.
CG 22 56 Exclusion—Injury to Volunteer Firefighters
Volunteer firefighters generally are either subject to state workers
compensation laws or are protected under special accident and
health plans against injury while performing their duties. When a CGL
policy is issued to a governmental subdivision or to a self-supporting
and independent fire-fighting unit, this exclusion is designed to
preclude the payment of damages for bodily injury or personal injury
sustained by these volunteers. (As of the 2001 CGL policy
amendments, volunteers are automatically included as insureds. Prior
to this change, it was said to be advisable to add the Additional
Insured—Volunteers Endorsement, CG 20 21. However, CG 20 21 no
longer is necessary, and was therefore withdrawn as of the 2001
amendments.)CG 22 57 Exclusion—Underground Resources and
Equipment
This is a mandatory endorsement for certain oil and gas producing
or servicing risks for liability arising out of property damage included
with the “underground resources and equipment hazard,” a term
defined as property damage to:
•    oil, gas, water or other mineral substances which have not
been reduced to physical possession above the surface of
the earth or above the surface of any body of water;
•    any well, hole, formation, strata or area in or through which
exploration for or production of any substance is carried on;
•    any casing, pipe, bit, tool, pump or drilling or well servicing
machinery or equipment located beneath the surface of the
earth in any such well or hole or beneath the surface of any
body of water.
Endorsement CG 22 62 is required to obtain coverage for what is
excluded here.
CG 22 58 Exclusion—Described Hazards (Carnivals,
Circuses, and Fairs)
Whether it is a governmental entity or a nonprofit organization that
is hosting a carnival, circus, or fair, its CGL policy generally will
contain this exclusion. Coverage may be available from the insurer for
excess over the liability insurance provided by the owner-operator of
the amusement devices. Otherwise, protection may be required from
the excess and surplus lines market.CG 22 59 Exclusion—Medical Payments to Members
(Horseback Riding Clubs)
This endorsement was in use for a number of years to preclude
medical payments for any member of a horseback riding club who
sustained injury arising out of any activities in connection with the
operations of the insured horseback riding club. Endorsement CG 20
02, Additional Insured—Club Members also has been used to add
members of a horseback riding club as insureds. Since there is an
exclusion under Coverage C in the CGL policy precluding medical
payments to insureds, ISO withdrew endorsement CG 22 59 with its
2001 amendments, since it would be redundant to continue the use of
this endorsement.
CG 22 60 Limitation of Coverage—Real Estate
Operations
This endorsement is designed to tailor CGL coverage to a smaller
type of real estate operation, such as one whose sole operations are
limited to the sale or rental of property and not to property
management. When this endorsement is attached to the CGL policy,
coverage is limited to the premises used by the named insured for
general office purposes. Coverage also is extended to activities
involved with premises listed for sale or rental, as long as (1) the
property is not managed by or in the care, custody, or control of the
named insured; or (2) the named insured does not act as an agent for
the collection of rents.
Prior to an amendment in 2007, coverage was limited solely to
injury or damage arising out of the ownership, operation, maintenance
of use of the premises listed with the named insured for sale or
rental, subject to certain conditions. Since, in custom and practice,
real estate agents also sell properties not listed by them, the
restriction as to listings has been eliminated. As this endorsementcurrently reads, it applies to injury or damage arising out of the
ownership, operation, maintenance or use of premises listed or
shown by the insured.
CG 22 62 Underground Resources and Equipment
Coverage
This endorsement can be used to cover certain oil and gas
producing exposures that are excluded by mandatory endorsement
CG 22 57, Exclusion—Underground Resources and Equipment,
subject to a separate aggregate limit and other specific exclusions
and conditions contained in endorsement CG 22 62.
This coverage endorsement was revised with the 2001 CGL
policy amendments by the addition of an exception to exclusion j.(4) in
the CGL form, to state that the exclusion:
… does not apply to any “property damage” included
within the “underground resources hazard” other than
“property damage” to that particular part of any real
property on which operations are being performed by you
or on your behalf if the “property damage” arises out of
those operations.
This change was prompted by various insurance agents groups.
Specifically, it has been questioned whether this endorsement
overrides certain CGL policy provisions. The questioners have
pointed to paragraph E.2(b.) of the definitions section of endorsement
CG 22 62, which reads: “any well, hole, formation, strata or area in
or through which exploration for or production of any substance is
carried on.” Some people have maintained that the foregoing
sentence implies that property damage to the listed items caused by
a servicing contractor is to be covered under the contractor’s
endorsed policy, regardless of exclusions, such as the care, custody,or control exclusion, j.(4) of CGL forms. It has been explained that
coverage remains subject to the CGL policy exclusions.
Also, paragraph D of endorsement CG 22 62 imposes duties upon
the insured, so it has been moved to the conditions section of the
CGL forms effective with the 2001 amendments.
CG 22 63 Stevedoring Operations (Limited Completed
Operations Coverage)
This endorsement modifies the definition of “products-completed
operations hazard” so that it does not include bodily injury or property
damage arising out of occurrences not on board vessels at the site of
operations after the operations have been completed or abandoned.
Thus, such occurrences would be subject to the general aggregate
limit rather than the products-completed operations aggregate limit.
CG 22 64 Pesticide or Herbicide Applicator Coverage
Were it not for this endorsement, one of the primary exposures of
an applicator’s business would be excluded because of the almost
absolute pollution or contamination exclusion of the CGL policy. The
Commercial Lines Manual of ISO requires the use of this
endorsement with classifications representing crop spraying by
contractors, fumigating, orchards and vineyards by contractors, pest
control services, and tree pruning, dusting, spraying, repairing,
trimming or fumigating.
So when this endorsement is issued to the above businesses,
paragraph (1.)(d.) of pollution exclusion f. of Section I—Coverage A
—bodily injury and property damage does not apply to an off-site
premises in connection with the named insured’s operations, provided
it meets and complies with all standards of any statute, ordinance,regulation, or license requirement of federal, state, or local
governments.
It is important to note that this endorsement will not fulfill the
coverage desired when employees or independent contractors of the
named insured are applying chemicals to the named insured’s own
property, such as country clubs or garden nurseries. The only
alternative short of having to purchase a special environmental liability
policy would be to add CG 24 15, limited pollution liability extension
endorsement to the CGL policy, limited solely to the application of
pesticides and herbicides and subject to the added proviso that
coverage also is contingent on meeting all the standards that are
listed in endorsement CG 24 15.
Note that with the 2013 revisions, the title of this endorsement is
changed. The revised title is Pesticide or Herbicide Applicator Limited
Pollution Coverage.
CG 22 65 Optical and Hearing Aid Establishments
This endorsement is necessary for an optical or hearing aid
establishment that requires coverage for its professional liability loss
exposure. The endorsement, in effect, offsets CG 22 37 Exclusion—
Products and Professional Services Optical and Hearing Aid
Establishments.
Paragraph 2.a.(1)(d) of the Who Is an Insured provision of the
CGL forms indicates that the named insured’s employees are not
insureds for bodily injury or property damage arising out of their
providing or failure to provide professional health care services. In
order to ensure that the named insured’s employees in an optical or
hearing aid establishment are protected, the 1993 amendment to this
endorsement modified the above section of the Who Is an Insured
provision to effect coverage for such employees. This endorsementalso changed the phrase “professional services” to the phrase
“professional health care services.”
Following the introduction by ISO of the Optometrists Professional
Liability Coverage Form in 1997, it became necessary, with the 1998
CGL policy revisions, to amend this endorsement, CG 22 65, so that
it would more closely correspond to the products liability exclusion of
the professional coverage form.
CG 22 66 Misdelivery of Liquid Products Coverage
This endorsement is necessary for any entity whose business
involves the delivery of liquid products because it clarifies a gray area
that otherwise applies between the CGL and business auto coverage
forms. The nature of the businesses, according to the ISO
Commercial Lines Manual that require this endorsement are:
anhydrous ammonia dealers and distributors, chemical distributors,
fertilizer dealers and distributors, fuel oil or kerosene dealers and
distributors, gas dealers or distributors, gasoline distributors, and milk
depots and dealers.
When attached, this endorsement modifies exclusion g. of the
CGL policy by specifically excepting, and therefore covering, bodily
injury or property damage arising out of (1) the delivery of any liquid
product into a wrong receptacle or to a wrong address, or (2) the
erroneous delivery of one liquid product for another by an auto—if the
injury or damage occurs after such operations have been completed
or abandoned at the site of the delivery. If injury or damage should
occur during the unloading process, coverage might apply under the
business auto or truckers policy, depending on the circumstances.
The fact that this endorsement does not address pollution losses
means that the pollution exclusion still applies. For fuel oil distributors
and other businesses involved in pollutants, this endorsement does
not hold much promise of coverage.CG 22 67 Corporal Punishment
When corporal punishment coverage is purchased, it is necessary
to clarify that the intentional injury exclusion of the CGL policy does
not apply; otherwise, coverage could be denied. Thus, when this
endorsement is attached, it states that the intentional injury exclusion
does not apply to bodily injury resulting from the use of reasonable
force to protect persons or property, and to any corporal punishment
to any student or pupil by or at the direction of any insured.
The 1993 amendment to this endorsement clarified that the
coverage for bodily injury resulting from corporal punishment is
intended to apply solely to the named insured’s students.
CG 22 68 Operation of Customers Autos on Particular
Premises
By exception to exclusion g. of the CGL policy, coverage does
apply for bodily injury or property damage arising out of the valet
parking of an auto that is not owned by or rented or loaned to the
named insured. This endorsement provides similar, though broader,
coverage for liability arising out of customers’ autos on the premises
(and adjoining ways) of auto repair or service shops, car washes,
gasoline stations, and tire dealers. While the regular exception to
exclusion g. applies only to parking of customers’ autos, this
endorsement does not limit the covered activity to parking. The chief
requirement is that the auto be on (or on ways next to) the insured
premises.
To answer a question that occasionally arises, this endorsement
would be necessary for a car wash operation where employees
actually take possession of the vehicles and maneuver them through
the wash system. The reason is that this kind of service exceeds themere parking of autos not owned, rented or loaned to the named
insured.
It is important to note that this coverage does not apply to
physical damage to a customer’s auto. The named insured would
require garagekeepers insurance for this exposure.
This endorsement was amended in 1993 to clarify what provisions
of the CGL forms are affected by this endorsement. Also, lead-in
language was added to make clear that the term “customer’s auto” is
defined in the definitions section of the CGL forms.
CG 22 69 Druggists
This endorsement is necessary when a druggist desires to add
professional and products liability insurance to an existing CGL policy.
If this endorsement is not purchased, the CGL coverage form is
issued with CG 22 36 Exclusion—Products and Professional Services
(Druggists).
The 1993 amendment to this endorsement corresponds to the
same change that affects endorsement CG 22 65. Thus, this
endorsement makes clear that employees of druggists will be
covered for their liability arising out of the rendering of or failure to
render professional health care services as pharmacists.
With an increasing number of state laws permitting the expansion
of the duties and responsibilities of pharmacists, the professional
liability exposure has expanded beyond what ISO has intended to
cover. For example, many of the statutes permit pharmacists to
prescribe and administer drugs and vaccinations and perform specific
duties such as blood tests. This endorsement, therefore, was
changed with the 2001 CGL policy amendments to exclude certain
types of pharmacists that are more of a professional nature and donot fall within the traditional duties of pharmacists. In light of this
change, ISO has also introduced a new endorsement, CG 22 97,
Druggists—B roadened Coverage, to be used in those states where
broader duties of pharmacists are permitted.
Note that the 2001 exclusion might now be in violation of certain
state or federal law. Therefore, the endorsement was changed under
the 2013 revisions to include an exception to the exclusion with
respect to the administering of vaccinations in accordance with any
applicable state or federal law.
CG 22 70 Real Estate Property Managed
According to the ISO Commercial Lines Manual, this endorsement
is mandatory whenever real estate agents or property managers are
classified under code 47052 (“Real Estate Property Managed”)
because they manage properties of others. This classification is used
to determine the rate to be applied against estimated receipts (from
managed properties) in calculating the premium. It is not used to
calculate premiums for property used for offices in conducting the
real estate agents’ or property managers’ business. That particular
exposure is classified and rated under code 47050 (“Real Estate
Agents”).
When this endorsement is issued, it is intended to serve two
purposes.
The first purpose is to preclude coverage for the real estate agent
or property manager for any liability having to do with property
damage to the property it manages or operates, or for which the real
estate agent or property manager acts as an agent for the collection
of rents. Unfortunately, leaving the real estate agent or property
manager (named insured) with no coverage under its CGL policy for
damage or destruction of the real estate that it manages or operatesmeans there are only three options to secure protection: (1) purchase
insurance on the property; (2) be named as an additional insured on
the owner’s property insurance; or (3) obtain a waiver of subrogation
and indemnity rights from the property owner.
The second purpose of this endorsement is to clarify that, with
respect to liability arising out of the real estate agent’s or property
manager’s management of the property, the policy issued to that
person or entity (to which this endorsement is attached) is considered
to be excess insurance over any other valid and collectible insurance
available to it. The reason this endorsement provides coverage and
applies on an excess basis is because the standard CGL policy (and
most independently filed policies) automatically include as an insured
(on a primary basis) any person or organization while acting as the
property owner’s real estate manager.
So, the real estate manager should have primary coverage, as an
additional insured under the owner’s CGL policy for liability because
of bodily injury, property damage or for offenses dealing with
personal and advertising injury sustained by third parties. If excess
coverage is necessary, it would come from the real estate agent’s or
property manager’s own CGL policy to which endorsement CG 22 70
is attached. (Note that CG 22 70 is revised now to reinforce the point
that the insurance provided is excess over any other insurance
available, whether such insurance is primary or excess.)
An important point to consider here is this: suppose the real
estate agent or property manager (1) does not purchase insurance
on the actual property being managed, (2) is not listed as an
additional insured under the property owner’s insurance, and (3) does
not obtain a waiver of subrogation and indemnity rights from the
property owner. Assume further that the real estate agent or property
manager negligently causes extensive damage to the managed
property. Based on the Real Estate Property Managed Endorsement
(CG 22 70) being attached to the real estate manager’s own CGLpolicy, there would be no coverage for that liability, according to the
first part of this endorsement which reads: this insurance does not
apply to property damage to property you operate or manage or as
to which you act as agent for the collection of rents or in any other
supervisory capacity.
The question then arises: if, as a real estate manager, the named
insured is not covered under his own CGL form, will the liability policy
of the entity for whom the named insured is employed to render
services as a real estate manager cover the manager for damage to
real property that he or she has been employed to operate or
manage? The answer is no. The reason is because of the damage to
property exclusion in the CGL form. Subsection j(1) excludes property
damage to property that the named insured owns, rents, or occupies.
Thus, even if the real estate manager is liable for damaging the
owner’s property, the policy of the owner will not pay the owner on
behalf of the real estate manager for damage to such property.
In summary, no coverage applies to property damage of property
a real estate manager operates or manages under the real estate
manager’s own liability policy because of endorsement CG 22 70.
And, coverage is not applicable under the liability policy of the owner
who employs the services of the real estate manager because of the
damage to property exclusion.
What about the second part of CG 22 70 that says that coverage
applies on an excess basis for liability arising out of the property
being managed? While that is not the intent of the endorsement
(unless damage to a third party arises out of the property manager’s
management of the property), it may seem reasonable to some
people (and the courts) to conclude that coverage does apply for that
liability, at least on an excess basis.A dispute between two insurers that bore out the ambiguity of this
endorsement is Allstate Insurance Company v. The West American
Insurance Company, No. 09-CV-00967-RBJMJW (U.S. D.C., CO.
2011). The underlying case (i.e., the case preceding this one
between two insurers), was between a homeowners association and
the developer-builder involving a variety of construction and
maintenance problems. Allstate provided liability insurance to both the
developer and property manager during the periods 1997-2003. West
American then provided coverage for the periods 2003-2005.
When the underlying case was settled, Allstate paid most of the
settlement amount and then sought contribution from West American,
which maintained that it had no contractual liability to its named
insureds (developer and property manager) because of the Real
Estate Property Managed Endorsement. This endorsement, with the
exception of two words, is virtually identical to the one of ISO. It
read: this insurance does not apply to property damage to property
you operate or manage as to which you act as agent for the
collection of rents or in any other supervisory capacity. With respect
to your liability arising out of your management of property for which
you are acting as real estate manager this insurance is excess over
any other valid and collective insurance available to you.
West American, citing the first paragraph of the endorsement,
argued that because the alleged property damage was caused by the
property manager, there was no coverage. According to the court,
the first paragraph of that endorsement could rationally be interpreted
in that manner. However, the second paragraph indicated that liability
arising from the property manager’s management of the property
applied excess to other applicable coverage. From the court’s
perspective, this created an ambiguity, because the two paragraphs
of the endorsement could be read as inconsistent; that is, damage to
property managed by the manager is not covered, but damage
caused by the manager is covered. Either way, said the court, as a
matter of law, the endorsement did not exclude coverage in this case.Based on the fact that the second part of the endorsement can
thus be argued to be read in two reasonable ways, it is likely that
insurers will have to amend this endorsement if they want to eliminate
having to pay for what they think should not be covered. The question
is whether the second part of the endorsement is even necessary,
given that property managers are viewed as additional insureds on a
primary basis of the liability policies issued to property owners. In
light of the possibility of other insurance disputes, perhaps the second
part of the endorsement could be moved to the other insurance
provision. Whatever the solution, trying to accomplish two purposes
with one endorsement does not seem to work here.
In the final analysis, endorsement CG 22 70 can be problematic
and invalidate more coverage than a real estate manager would ever
expect. However, much depends on the facts of each case.
CG 22 71 Colleges or Schools (Limited Form)
Either this endorsement or endorsement CG 22 72 must be
attached to a CGL policy when a college or school is operated by the
named insured or on its behalf. (The only difference between the two
endorsements is that the latter one includes Coverage C for medical
payments.) These endorsements have the following effects on CGL
coverage.
1.    They exclude coverage for:
•    bodily injury or property damage arising out of the
transportation of students to and from schools; and
•    liability arising out of the rendering of or failure to render
professional health care services if the college or school
owns or operates either an infirmary with facilities for
lodging and treatment or a public clinic or hospital.2.    They add the following parties as additional insureds:
•    the trustees or members of the Board of Governors, if
the college or school is a private charitable or
educational institution;
•    any board member or commissioners, if the college or
school is a public board or commission; and
•    any student teachers teaching as part of their
educational requirements.
These two endorsements were amended in 1997 with the addition
of an exclusion of injury to athletic or sports participants instead of
requiring the issuance of endorsement CG 21 01, Exclusion—Athletic
or Sports Participants, when called for in the CLM footnote relating to
the “Stadiums” classification. This exclusion reads as follows:
“Bodily injury” to any person while practicing for or
participating in any sports or athletic contest or exhibition if
there is no direct management, organization or supervision
of such sports or athletic contest by any insured.
While this exclusion will apply regardless of whether the insured
school has a stadium, its application will be restricted to situations in
which the qualifications listed in the exclusion are met.
When the college or school owns or operates an infirmary with
facilities for lodging and treatment or a public clinic or hospital,
professional services are specifically excluded. A new exclusion being
added in the recent revisions states that the professional services are
excluded even if claims against any insured allege negligence or other
wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring, employment, training, or
monitoring of others by that insured—provided the occurrence which
caused the bodily injury or property damage or the offense whichcaused the personal and advertising injury involved the provisions as
stated with regard to the professional services exclusion.
Another revision to CG 22 71 deals with exclusion g. on the CGL
form that pertains to aircraft, auto, or watercraft. This exclusion on
CG 22 71 consists of two paragraphs. The first paragraph (which has
not been revised) precludes coverage for injury or damage arising out
of the ownership, maintenance, operation, use, loading or unloading
or entrustment to others of any aircraft, auto or watercraft that is
owned, operated or hired by any insured; this provision also defines
the word “hired” to include any contract to furnish transportation of
students to and from schools. The second paragraph precludes
coverage even if claims against any insured (changed from the
insured) alleged negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision,
hiring, employment, training, or monitoring of others by the insured—
provided the occurrence which caused the bodily injury or property
damage involved the ownership, maintenance, use, loading or
unloading or entrustment to others of any aircraft, auto or watercraft
that is owned, operated or hired by any insured.
(New to this exclusion is the preceding phrase that is underlined
for emphasis. It formerly read: that is owned, operated or rented or
loaned to any insured.)
CG 22 72 Colleges or Schools
This endorsement is the same as CG 22 71, discussed above,
except that CG 22 72 includes coverage for medical expenses.
CG 22 73 Exclusion—Oil or Gas Producing Operations
There are exceptions to the pollution exclusion of the CGL
coverage forms under paragraph (1)(d) of that exclusion. However,
when the business of the named insured concerns oil or gasproducing operations, this endorsement eliminates the exceptions.
This exclusion applies to locations on which the named insured is
performing operations.
CG 22 74 Amendment of Contractual Liability Exclusion
for Personal Injury Limited to False Arrest, Detention, or
Imprisonment for Designated Contracts or Agreements
Until revised in 1996, this endorsement was titled “Amendment of
Contractual Liability Exclusion for Personal Injury.” The endorsement
modifies the Coverage B exclusion of liability assumed under
contract. The result is that Coverage B applies to liability for false
arrest, detention, or imprisonment that the insured assumes under a
contract designated in the endorsement schedule.
The 1992 and 1996 versions of the endorsement also provide for
the payment of related defense costs assumed under a designated
contract, subject to provisions similar to those contained in the 1992
and 1996 CGL forms relating to coverage of defense costs assumed
under an “insured contract” under Coverage A.
The endorsement was amended again in 1997 to more specifically
state that the payment of defense expenses and/or the providing of a
defense to an indemnitee applies only to personal injury arising out of
the offenses of false arrest, detention, or imprisonment.
The current version of CG 22 74 (10 01) is titled “Limited
Contractual Liability Coverage for Personal and Advertising Injury”.
This version of the endorsement clearly states that the contractual
liability exclusion does not apply to liability for personal and
advertising injury if the personal and advertising injury arises out of
the offenses of false arrest, detention or imprisonment.CG 22 75 Professional Liability Exclusion—Computer
Software
This endorsement, introduced in 1998, states that it excludes
bodily injury, property damage, personal and advertising injury arising
out of the rendering of, or failure to render any service by or on
behalf of the named insured in connection with the selling, licensing,
franchising or furnishing of computer software, including EDP
processing programs, designs, manuals and instructions. Use of the
phraseology “rendering of, or failure to render” is common to
professional liability exclusions and is intended to serve as a “clean
sweep.”
An important question here, however, is why this exclusion is
labeled as a professional liability one when, in fact, it does not even
mention the word professional within the contents of the exclusion.
Are the words “any service” meant to exclude all services or only
those of a professional nature, as the title of this endorsement
suggests? The problem for any business looking for liability insurance
to cover what is being excluded may have difficulty, not in finding the
coverage, but in obtaining coverage that will apply to any act, error or
omission. If it turns out that the best a business can obtain is
coverage for negligent acts, errors or omissions, there may be a gap,
because there is a difference between any act, which includes an
intentional and unintentional act, and a negligent act, which is limited
to an unintentional act.
The 1993 amendment to this endorsement introduced the entire
text of the CGL contractual liability exclusion but without the usual
exception relating to “insured contracts.” In the previous edition, the
endorsement simply stated that the exception to exclusion b.
(contractual liability) did not apply.CG 22 76 Professional Liability Exclusion—Health or
Exercise Clubs
This endorsement excludes the professional liability exposure of
persons who render services or advice relating to health and exercise
clubs. Care must be exercised by such businesses that the person
who provides such services otherwise qualifies for professional
liability insurance that will at least encompass the liability that is
excluded by this endorsement.
CG 22 77 Professional Liability Exclusion—Electronic
Data Processing
This endorsement excludes the professional liability exposures
that arise out of electronic data processing services, whether
performed by or on behalf of the named insured. Consequently, if the
named insured is subject to this endorsement and performs such
services it should ascertain that its professional liability policy
encompasses what is excluded by this endorsement. If the services
are to be performed by others, the named insured should obtain
proper proof that the firm performing the services has adequate
professional liability insurance, since this endorsement also excludes
the vicarious liability of the insured when work is performed by others.
CG 22 78 Hazardous Material Contractors
When this endorsement is attached to the CGL coverage form of
a contractor who handles hazardous materials, it modifies exclusion f.
(pollution) to allow coverage for bodily injury or property damage
resulting from the removal, replacement, repair, enclosure, or
encapsulation of any hazardous material.
CG 22 79 Exclusion—Contractors—Professional
LiabilityThis endorsement is intended to be added to policies covering
construction firms that also provide professional engineering,
architectural, or surveying services to others. The endorsement
excludes liability for professional engineering, architectural, or
surveying services (1) that the named insured provides to others in
the capacity of an engineer, architect, or surveyor; and (2) that the
named insured provides, or hires independent professionals to
provide, in connection with construction performed by the named
insured.
However, the endorsement specifically preserves coverage for
“services within construction means, methods, techniques,
sequences, and procedures employed by you in connection with your
operations in your capacity as a construction contractor.” This
language is intended to clarify that such services that are part of
construction operations will not be excluded by the professional
services exclusion.
This endorsement was introduced as part of the 1996 CGL policy
revisions because of the case of Harbor Insurance Company v.
OMNI Construction, Inc., 912 F.2d 1520 (D.C. Cir. 1990). This case
held that liability coverage for a general contractor was excluded
when an endorsement similar to CG 22 43, Exclusion—Engineers,
Architects, or Surveyors Professional Liability (prior to the current
edition), was attached to the contractor’s umbrella liability policy.
After shoring designed by a subcontractor on the project caused the
partial collapse of an adjacent building, the general contractor, who
also maintained a professional liability policy, sought coverage under
his umbrella policy. In doing so, the contractor maintained that the
design work of sheeting and shoring, which allegedly caused the
damage, was not a “professional service” but rather the “means and
methods of construction,” or an operation “incidental” to the
construction work.The crux of the general contractor’s claim was that in the custom
and practice of the construction business, professional services
performed by a subcontractor incidental to the contractor’s
construction work are referred to as “means and methods of
construction,” rather than “professional services.” Under the general
contractor’s interpretation, a loss caused by defective engineering
work (a professional service) where both the engineering work and its
implementation are done by a single contractor, would be considered
incidental to the construction and therefore covered.
The court nonetheless held that the exclusionary endorsement
was clear and unambiguous. As such, the court agreed with the
insurer, which maintained that (1) damage to the adjacent building
was caused by an error in design of the shoring system of a
subcontractor, (2) such design work constituted a professional
service, and (3) the resulting loss therefore was excluded.
Thus, when the classification “Engineers or Architects—co nsulting
—not engaged in actual construction” is applicable, the ISO manual
rules recommend that endorsement CG 22 43 be used. ISO warns,
however, that when applied to a construction contracting risk, this
endorsement may exclude some of the basic contracting functions
performed by the risk based on blueprints or plans by others or by
themselves in their capacity as an engineer, architect or surveyor.
Therefore, endorsement CG 22 79 was introduced. It applies to the
professional liability of contractors (1) who provide architectural,
engineering, or surveying services to others; (2) who subcontract the
design portion of a job; and (3) who are involved in design and build
work. However, this exclusion does not apply to an insured
contractor’s liability arising out of services within construction means,
methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures employed by the
named insured in connection with its operations as a construction
contractor, whether or not such services are considered to be
professional services.CG 22 80 Limited Exclusion—Contractors—Professional
Liability
This endorsement was introduced at the same time as the above
endorsement, CG 22 79, for purposes of addressing professional
services rendered by or for a named insured construction firm. This
endorsement is intended for policies covering construction contractors
who may also provide professional services to others. The
endorsement is similar to endorsement CG 22 79 in that both exclude
professional errors or omissions in connection with engineering,
architectural, or surveying services that the named insured provides in
its capacity as an engineer, architect, or surveyor. However, unlike
endorsement CG 22 79, CG 22 80 does not exclude coverage for the
liability of a contractor who designs and builds a project for others,
whether the design work is performed by the named insured or a
subcontractor.
It may be interesting to note that underwriters are reluctant to
issue this endorsement despite the fact it is an exclusion. What
appears to worry underwriters is the exception to the exclusion of this
endorsement which states that the professional services excluded do
not apply to the named insured’s operations in connection with
construction work performed by the named insured or on its behalf.
Based on the arrangement in the above OMNI Construction case, it
would have been necessary to have this endorsement and not
endorsement CG 22 79 to cover the claim in question. Prospects
cannot simply accept endorsement 22 79 because it is more readily
available without first identifying the nature of the exposure. Above all,
when either of these endorsements is issued, insureds must see to it
that the policy also is not amended with CG 22 43 Exclusion—
Engineers, Architects, or Surveyors Professional Liability (the “clean
sweep” exclusion).
CG 22 81 Exclusion—Erroneous Delivery or Mixture and
Resulting Failure of Seed to Germinate—SeedMerchants
This endorsement, introduced in 1996, was designed to be
attached to policies whose named insured takes the following rating
classification: “Seed Merchants—excluding misdelivery, error in
mixture, and germination failure” (class code 16890). Accordingly, the
endorsement excludes a seed merchant’s liability for property
damage arising out of (1) the erroneous delivery of seed, (2) an error
in mechanical mixture of seed, and (3) the failure of seed to
germinate.
For less extensive seed merchant exclusions, see endorsements
CG 24 18 and CG 24 19.
CG 22 87 Exclusion—Adult Day Care Centers
This endorsement affects bodily injury, property damage, personal
and advertising injury, and medical payments coverages under the
CGL forms. It excludes coverage arising out of the rendering of or
failure to render medical or nursing service, treatment, advice, or
instructions by any insured. Also excluded are health or therapeutic
services, any service for the purpose of appearance or skin
enhancement, and medical payments expenses for bodily injury to
any person in the care of the insured.
CG 22 88 Professional Liability Exclusion—Electronic
Data Processing Services and Computer Consulting or
Programming Services
This endorsement excludes coverage for bodily injury, property
damage, or personal and advertising injury arising out of the
rendering of or failure to render electronic data processing, computer
consulting, or computer programming services, advice, or instruction
by the insured. The endorsement also excludes these services if theyare provided by any person or organization for whose acts or
omissions the insured is legally responsible.
CG 22 89 Exclusion—Property Damage to Electronic
Data (Computer Software Manufacturer)
This endorsement’s intended purpose is to exclude property
damage to electronic data arising out of computer software programs
(1) developed and manufactured by the named insured, (2)
developed by the named insured and made by others under a
contract, or (3) developed by others and manufactured by the named
insured.
As part of the 1998 policy revisions, this endorsement was
amended to redefine paragraph f. of the definition of insured contract
so as not to include any licensing, franchising, or similar agreement
with respect to the manufacturing and/or development of computer
software programs.
This endorsement was withdrawn with the 2001 revisions because
those revisions included new endorsements that exclude professional
liability for Internet-related professions.
CG 22 90 Professional Liability Exclusion—Spas or
Personal Enhancement Facilities
This endorsement excludes coverage for injury or damage arising
out of any professional services performed by the insured in
conjunction with any spa or personal enhancement facility described
in the endorsement’s schedule. Such services include acts of the
insured in connection with professional services or advice that may
directly impact the health or physical appearance of the insured’s
clients.CG 22 91 Exclusion—Telecommunication Equipment or
Service Providers Errors and Omissions
This endorsement excludes bodily injury, property damage, or
personal and advertising injury arising out of any error, omission,
defect, or deficiency in any evaluation, consultation, or advice given
by the insured in this particular business.
The problem with this endorsement is that insureds subject to it
will likely be unable to obtain an errors or omissions policy that will
include coverage for bodily injury, property damage, and personal and
advertising injury. What an errors or omissions policy generally covers
is the economic damages that result from a negligent act, error, or
omission. That is what should be excluded by this endorsement
instead of bodily injury, property damage, and personal and
advertising injury. As a result, there is likely to be a gap in coverage
between the CGL and E&O policies.
CG 22 92 Snowplowing Operations Coverage
Until 2007, there was an obstacle in obtaining coverage for
snowplowing after the work has been completed. Let’s take the
individuals, for example, who on a part-time basis to earn extra
money use their ubiquitous pickup trucks with snow plow
attachments. The ISO personal auto policy would cover such
business use of pickup trucks during the snowplowing process by
exception to exclusion 7. The question is, however, whether that
policy would cover the insured’s liability after the snowplowing is
completed. A great deal here hinges on the meaning of how far “use”
of a covered auto can be stretched. It is an argument that individuals
can ill afford to encounter. It also is doubtful that an insurer will permit
the issuance of an insurance certificate to a business, such as Wal-
Mart confirming that the appropriate coverage is being provided.Those individuals who maintain a Business Auto Policy (BAP)
should have no problem having a certificate of insurance issued. The
problem is that the BAP excludes bodily injury or property damage
arising out of the named insured’s work after that work has been
completed or abandoned. On the other hand, the CGL coverage form
—to the extent these individuals even maintain one—excludes claims
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, use or entrustment to
others of any auto owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any
insured.
The questions then are how to protect (1) these individuals who
offer their snowplowing services to others, (2) property owners for
work performed by others, and (3) property owners who perform
their own snowplowing work.
It may be easier to fill the coverage gap now with the introduction
by ISO in 2007 of its Snowplowing Operations Coverage
endorsement CG 22 92, applicable in most jurisdictions. When
issued, this endorsement amends the aircraft, auto or watercraft
exclusion g. of the CGL coverage form, and states concisely that with
the “products-completed operations hazard,” this exclusion does not
apply to any auto used for snowplowing operations. With this new
endorsement, the independent contractor’s BAP will apply to bodily
injury or property damage happening during snowplowing work, while
its CGL policy will apply for injury or damage taking place after the
work has been completed.
Property owners and those responsible for maintaining business
real property, including parking lots, still need to be concerned about
adequate coverage, given that they, too, are likely to be named in any
legal action. Fortunately, no additional coverage for the property
owner or other entity maintaining such property is necessary in order
to obtain completed operations coverage for snowplowing operations
performed by others, other than an existing CGL policy. The reason is
that, while the CGL policy excludes bodily injury or property damagearising out of the ownership, maintenance, use or entrustment to
another of an auto owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any
insured, this exclusion does not apply when the auto is owned or
operated by an independent contractor. The CGL policy, therefore,
should provide coverage to the property owner or entity that has
responsibility for maintaining the premises both during snowplowing
work and after the work has been completed.
If the property owner or entity responsible for the property
conducts its own snow removal operations, it will require a BAP for
coverage for injury or damage during the removal process, and
endorsement CG 22 92 attached to its CGL policy for coverage after
the work has been completed. The ISO Commercial General Liability
Rules filing shows with reference to “Snow and Ice Removal
Contractor” to refer to the “Street Cleaning Classification,” which
includes snow removal. That classification in the Commercial Lines
Manual Classification Table, however, excludes the drivers’ payroll
when snow plow operations are performed by auto. To accommodate
the use of autos in snow removal under the CGL policy, ISO has
introduced a new classification code for snowplow operations, with
the coverage cost basis being the drivers’ payroll.
CG 22 93 Lawn Care Services Coverage
This endorsement was introduced for use with the 1998 revisions
for purposes of narrowing the pollution exclusion f. of CGL forms by
stating that paragraph (1)(d) of that exclusion does not apply to the
application of herbicides or pesticides by an insured on lawns under
the named insured’s regular care, for which the insured is not
required to obtain a license or permit to apply herbicides or
pesticides. The kind of chemicals for which this endorsement has
applied are those obtained over-the-counter.In 2007, the class code for lawn care services was revised so as
to encompass the use of chemicals requiring a license or permit. In
light of this change, this CG 22 93 endorsement was modified with
the deletion of the phrase “for which the insured is not required to
obtain a license or permit to apply.” With this revision, coverage
applies to insureds required to obtain a license or permit to apply
herbicides and pesticides on lawns where they regularly work.
Note that under the 2013 revisions, the title of this endorsement is
changed. The revised title is Lawn Care Services Limited Pollution
Coverage. The reason put forth for this change is said to better
reflect the purpose of CG 22 93.
CG 22 94 Exclusion—Damage to Work Performed by
Subcontractors on Your Behalf
This is one of two endorsements newly introduced with the 2001
CGL policy revisions to combat coverage for construction defects.
The other exclusion is CG 22 95. Even though construction defects
are considered business risks and not covered under the liability
policy of the contractor who performed the work, coverage still can
apply whenever an insured (a general contractor, for example) uses
subcontractors. The reason is that by exception to exclusion l.
(Damage to Your Work), coverage may apply, for example, to: (1)
damage to the general contractor’s work arising out of a
subcontractor’s work, (2) damage to a subcontractor’s work, or (3) if
the insured is a subcontractor, damage to a general contractor’s
work or another subcontractor’s work.
This is a blanket-type endorsement that amends exclusion l. by
deleting the subcontractor exception for all exposures. The impact,
therefore, is to virtually eliminate broad form property damage
coverage for the completed operations hazard.As a matter of interest and perhaps of historical significance,
broad form property damage coverage was first introduced in 1955
and affected exposures relating solely to work while in progress. It
was not until 1969 that broad form property damage became
available for completed operations. During both decades, the
coverage was available solely on an advisory basis on behalf of the
ISO predecessors. Broad form property damage was available by
endorsement either with or without completed operations until the
introduction of the broad form CGL endorsement in 1976. At that
time, broad form property damage automatically included coverage
for completed operations. In fact, it was a requirement of eligibility for
the broad form CGL endorsement that the insured maintain both
products and completed operations coverage. When the simplified
CGL forms were introduced in 1986, the tradition of automatically
including completed operations by exception to exclusion l. was
continued. So the offer of broad form property damage including
completed operations coverage lasted approximately thirty-six years.
With this endorsement being available as an underwriting tool,
insurers may add the endorsement to some CGL policies of general
contractors. Producers and risk managers should try to avoid this
endorsement being imposed on their contractor insureds. If they
cannot avoid the endorsement, they should explain its full impact to
insureds that are affected.
Unfortunately for insureds, as discussed in Chapter 1, some
insurers have been successful in maintaining that defective work is
neither an occurrence nor property damage. When a court is
convinced of this argument, it is unnecessary for such an insurer to
rely on any exclusion, including this endorsement. Some insurers in
this category, in successfully denying coverage, also offer special
insurance to compensate for their action but most of such coverage is
inferior and not recommended for purchase.CG 22 95 Exclusion—Damage to Work Performed by
Subcontractors on Your Behalf—Designated Sites or
Operations
This endorsement was introduced at the same time as CG 22 94
and for the same reasons. Its purpose is to delete coverage for
designated sites or operations, rather than on a blanket basis as is
the function of endorsement CG 22 94.
CG 22 96 Limited Exclusion—Personal and Advertising
Injury—Lawyers
This endorsement was new to the 2001 CGL policy revisions and
is intended to close a potential gap in coverage that currently exists
with CGL forms. Currently, endorsement CG 21 38, Exclusion—
Personal and Advertising Injury, is attached to all CGL policies
covering lawyers’ offices. The reason for this mandatory
endorsement is that personal and advertising injury coverage often
can be provided by a lawyers professional liability policy. The
endorsement can apply even when a lawyer engages in some
services that are not considered to be professional in nature, such as
acting as a landlord. These types of activities may also be excluded
by the lawyers professional liability policy in some instances.
Thus, to fill a potential coverage gap, this endorsement, CG 22
96, which is optional, may be used when the lawyer’s professional
liability policy provides personal and advertising injury coverage for
professional services only.
CG 22 97 Druggists—Broadened Coverage
For the purpose of this endorsement, which was revised with the
2001 amendments, refer to the explanation under endorsement CG22 69—Druggists. This broadened coverage endorsement applies in
those states that permit pharmacists to perform broader duties.
CG 22 98 Exclusion—Internet Service Providers and
Internet Access Providers Errors and Omissions
This endorsement was introduced with the 2001 CGL policy
revisions to exclude coverage for bodily injury or property damage
arising out of the rendering of or failure to render Internet service or
Internet access that is provided by or on behalf of any insured. ISO
made an editorial revision to this endorsement in 2004 by removing
references to personal and advertising injury, since personal and
advertising injury arising from these exposures is already precluded
by exclusion j. of coverage B.
This endorsement is comprised of two parts: The first part
excludes an error, omission, defect or deficiency in any evaluation,
consultation or advice concerning Internet services, and the second
part excludes the failure to adequately provide any such services or
access.
A possible problem with this exclusion for the insurer is the
omission of the term “negligent act,” since there are differences
between negligent act, error or omission. For example, the court in
the case of First Newton National Bank v. General Casualty Co.,426
N.W.2d 618 (1988), held that an exclusion for claims arising out of
error or omission or mistake committed by the insured did not include
negligence. The policy, therefore, covered the negligent claims. In
fact, even if this exclusion were to include negligent acts, there still
would be room for arguing that an intentional act remains covered,
because the term “any act” is broader than negligent act and does
not encompass error or omission. A case in point is Continental Cas.
Co. v. Cole, 809 F.2d 891 (D.C.Cir. 1987), where the policy language“error, negligent omission or negligent act of the insured” was held to
cover all errors, not only negligent ones, and included intentional acts.
The problem with this endorsement confronting insureds is that
they will likely be unable to obtain an errors or omissions policy that
will include coverage for bodily injury, property damage, and personal
and advertising injury. What an errors or omissions policy generally
covers is the economic damages that result from a negligent act,
error, or omission. That is what should be excluded by this
endorsement instead of bodily injury, property damage, and personal
and advertising injury. As a result, there will likely be a gap in
coverage between the CGL and E&O policies.
CG 22 99 Professional Liability Exclusion—Website
Designers
This endorsement was introduced with the 2001 CGL policy
revisions to exclude coverage for injury or damage arising out of the
rendering of or failure to render website designer or consultant
services by the insured or anyone for whom the insured has a legal
responsibility. ISO made an editorial revision to this endorsement in
2004 by removing references to personal and advertising injury, since
personal and advertising injury arising from these exposures are
already precluded by exclusion j. of coverage B.
Why this endorsement is titled a professional liability exclusion
rather than an errors or omissions exclusion is unclear, considering
that young people today can do wonders in design work without
having to attend any special schooling. Perhaps it is because of the
term designers. A larger question is whether policies for website
designers will be true professional liability policies, or only errors and
omissions policies. The difference is significant because errors and
omissions policies do not commonly cover bodily injury or property
damage.CG 23 01 Exclusion—Real Estate Agents or Brokers
Errors or Omissions
This endorsement, newly introduced with the 2004 revisions, is
mandatory for all policies covering real estate agents or brokers. By
excluding bodily injury, property damage, and personal and
advertising injury arising out of any misrepresentation, error, or
omission by an insured real estate agent or broker, CG 23 01
automatically creates a gap in coverage. The reason is that a real
estate agent’s or broker’s errors or omissions policy will not likely
include coverage for bodily injury, property damage, or personal and
advertising injury. What should have been excluded here are damages
because of misrepresentation, error, or omission, other than bodily
injury, property damage, or personal and advertising injury damages.
Coverage Amendment Endorsements
CG 24 01 Nonbinding Arbitration
This endorsement is designed for use with CGL, liquor, OCP,
pollution, products/completed operations, and railroad protective
coverage parts.
It gives both the insured and insurer the right to submit their
differences to arbitration proceedings, but the decision is not binding.
This means the party dissatisfied with the decision can appeal it to a
court of competent jurisdiction. The nature of an insured’s business
may prompt the use of this endorsement at the time the coverage
part is issued.
CG 24 02 Binding Arbitration
The only difference between this endorsement and the preceding
one is that the decision agreed to by two of the three arbitrators isbinding on the insured and insurer.
CG 24 03 Waiver of Charitable Immunity
This endorsement usually is added automatically to CGL policies
of charitable institutions. It clarifies that the insurer will waive any
immunity in the event of any claim against the institution (insured),
unless the institution requests in writing that the insurer not do so. The
endorsement therefore is more for the protection of the insurer than
the institution. This endorsement also clarifies that waiver of immunity
as a defense will not subject the insurer to liability in excess of the
policy’s limit.
CG 24 04 Waiver of Transfer of Rights of Recovery
against Others to Us
The subrogation condition of CGL forms states in effect that if the
insured has rights to recover from a third party all or part of any
payment the insurer has made, those rights are transferred to the
insurer. Also, the insured must do nothing after loss to impair those
rights.
The inference, therefore, is that the insured can waive the
insurer’s rights of subrogation before a loss. However, not all courts
(those of California and Washington are examples) agree with that
premise. In states such as these, it is advisable to add this waiver of
subrogation endorsement. A potential problem with the endorsement
is that it applies only to the party scheduled. It seems logical to
assume that if a corporation is scheduled, the waiver also applies to
any officer, director, or stockholder. Likewise, if a partnership is
scheduled, it would appear that the waiver also applies to the
partners. Unfortunately, the endorsement is not clear on this point and
could therefore lead to problems. It is also incumbent upon those who
service clients to check contracts for waivers of subrogation so thatthis endorsement can be issued. A better alternative would be to
issue this on a blanket basis thereby avoiding the chances that the
issuance of this endorsement may be overlooked.
This endorsement was originally designed for use with the CGL
and OCP coverage parts. However, the 1993 amendment removed
reference to the OCP coverage part in this endorsement because a
separate endorsement, CG 29 88, is designed for use with the OCP
coverage part.
CG 24 05 Financial Institutions (Reporting Provision and
Limitation to Fiduciary or Representative Interest)
This is a reporting form that would commonly be added to the
policy of a bank or other financial institution to make clear the
obligations of the trust department when it acquires and relinquishes
properties of others. To this end, the named insured must report to
the insurer every sixty days the properties acquired and relinquished.
However, the insurer must be notified immediately whenever the
named insured acquires control of a business and assumes its active
management or control. While the reporting results may be used for
premium determination, failure of the insured to report as required will
not invalidate the insurance.
This endorsement was revised in 2004 to include the provisions
extending the CGL policy to cover fiduciary interests as contained in
CG 24 11 Fiduciaries—F iduciary Interest. By doing so, it is no longer
necessary to attach both endorsements to limit coverage under the
CGL policy for damages solely arising out of the insured’s trust
operations.
CG 24 06 Liquor Liability—Bring Your Own Alcohol
EstablishmentsA new optional endorsement with reference to the liquor liability
exclusions of the CGL Coverage Part, is CG 24 06 for use with the
Liquor Liability Coverage Form CG 00 33 (Occurrence) or CG 00 34
(Claims-Made) that provides coverage to insureds who permit any
person to bring their own beverages on the premises for
consumption.
With this new endorsement, both liquor endorsements CG 21 50
and CG 21 51 also are revised to indicate that the liquor liability
exclusion in the CGL Coverage Form will apply to BYOB exposures.
CG 24 07 Products/Completed Operations Hazard
Redefined
This endorsement is designed primarily for establishments that
serve food and beverages for consumption on their business
premises. When attached to the CGL policy, the endorsement
redefines the “products-completed operations hazard” to include
products consumed on the premises where they are sold.
Consequently, claims arising out of food and beverages consumed on
the named insured’s premises are subject to the products-completed
operations aggregate limit, rather than the general aggregate limit.
Or, if the policy excludes the products-completed operations hazard,
such claims are excluded.
CG 24 08 Liquor Liability
When attached to the CGL policy, this endorsement deletes the
liquor liability exclusion. The other method of providing coverage is to
purchase the separate liquor liability coverage part CG 00 33
(occurrence) or CG 00 34 (claims-made), if available from the
insurer. Otherwise, such insurance may be available from a specialty
lines insurer.This endorsement was revised in 1993 to reflect the title of the
deleted exclusion. Thus, the endorsement now reads: “Exclusion c.—
Liquor Liability of COVERAGE A—Bodily Injury and Property
Damage Liability (Section I—Coverages) does not apply.”
CG 24 09 Governmental Subdivisions
This endorsement is automatically added to the CGL policy
whenever a municipality or other political subdivision is the named
insured. It has two purposes. The first is to change the nomenclature
of the Who Is an Insured provision to conform more closely to
governmental entities. This amendment apparently was prompted by
a number of court decisions that held the persons insured provisions
of earlier liability policies to be inappropriate to governmental entities.
This endorsement also clarifies that land motor vehicles designed
for travel on public roads and owned or leased by the governmental
subdivision are to be considered as autos, rather than mobile
equipment, if the only reason for considering such vehicles as mobile
equipment is that they are maintained for use exclusively on streets
and highways that such entity owns. If it were not for this
endorsement, a governmental subdivision could dispense with
automobile liability insurance by maintaining that all of its vehicles are
mobile equipment and, hence, covered automatically under the CGL
policy.
The 1993 change to this endorsement amended the text of the
definition of mobile equipment so as to make it easier to read.
CG 24 10 Excess Provision—Vendors
Vendors who desire protection as additional insureds on CGL
policies of manufacturers can be added under endorsement CG 20
15 Additional Insured—Vendors. Whenever such vendor alsomaintains its own CGL policy, the insurer may amend the policy with
the addition of this endorsement. The effect is to make the vendor’s
own CGL policy excess over the manufacturer’s CGL policy to which
endorsement CG 20 15 is attached.
This endorsement was revised with the 1993 changes to also
make it applicable to the separate Products/Completed Operations
Coverage Part. In addition, language was added to this latest version
of the endorsement to clarify that it amends the “Other Insurance”
condition of the CGL forms.
This endorsement was withdrawn from use by ISO in 1997. It is
no longer needed because the other insurance conditions of CGL
forms make an insured’s own CGL policy excess over insurance
provided by any other liability policy when that insured is covered by
that other policy as an additional insured. It is important to note that if
an insurer does not incorporate the other insurance provisions of the
current CGL policy into its own policy, then this endorsement
obviously would still be necessary. This caveat is being mentioned
because some insurers use some ISO policy provisions but not
necessarily all of them. A tell-tale sign is when the coverage form
contains a copyright notice stating that it includes copyrighted
material of ISO.
CG 24 11 Fiduciaries—Fiduciary Interest
The purpose of this endorsement is to tailor protection of the CGL
coverage form to an entity that has a fiduciary interest in the property
of others. For example, the endorsement redefines the Who Is an
Insured provision to include certain persons and organizations
commonly associated with trusts and guardianships of real and
personal property, such as a ward, a life tenant, and an heir.In addition to restructuring the endorsement’s format and making
some editorial changes in 1998, ISO amended the lead-in language
of CG 24 11 to indicate that the coverage provided applies to injury or
damage “… arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use,
including all related operations, of property…”
CG 24 12 Boats
The basic CGL policy provisions limit liability coverage of
watercraft to those less than twenty-six feet long, not owned by the
named insured, and not being used to carry persons or property for a
charge. These limitations can be amended with the attachment of
endorsement CG 24 12. When the endorsement is attached for an
additional premium as designated, exclusion g. of the CGL coverage
form is amended so that liability coverage does apply to any
watercraft owned, used by, or rented to the insured and described in
the schedule. Also protected as an insured is any person or
organization legally responsible for the use of a covered watercraft
owned by the named insured, provided that actual use is with the
named insured’s permission.
CG 24 13 Amendment of Personal and Advertising
Injury Definition
CG 24 13 is a new exclusionary endorsement.
Currently, Coverage B., Personal and Advertising Injury Liability
covers the “oral or written publication, in any manner, of material that
violates a person’s right of privacy”. CG 24 13 eliminates that
coverage. This, according to ISO, is a restriction. Given the fact that
this coverage has taken on importance with the Internet, the issuance
of this endorsement can result in a serious restriction of coverage.
CG 24 14 Waiver of Governmental ImmunityThis endorsement is comparable in purpose and scope to
endorsement CG 24 03, Waiver of Charitable Immunity. Waiver of
Governmental Immunity Endorsement, CG 24 14, for use with the
CGL, provides an option to an insured that has immunity but is willing
to waive such an immunity as a defense otherwise applicable. This
endorsement is now revised so that it can also apply in connection
with the Owners and Contractors Protective Liability Coverage Part
and the Railroad Protective Liability Coverage Part.
CG 24 16 Canoes or Rowboats
This endorsement was introduced in 2007 to better accommodate
the hotels/motels classifications regarding watercraft. Prior to this
change, the classifications for hotels/motels with pools or beaches
contained a footnote to the effect that coverage was included for the
operation of owned watercraft of the kind described by using the
endorsement CG 24 12 for boats. Hotels/motels without pools or
beaches, on the other hand, included coverage for the operation of
owned canoes and rowboats by attaching the same endorsement CG
24 12.
Under this current change, the hotels/motels classifications having
pools or beaches have been revised to reflect that owned watercraft,
other than owned canoes and rowboats, need to be separately
classified, rated and covered under endorsement CG 24 12. The
hotels/motels classifications where there are no pools or beaches are
covered with the attachment of a new endorsement, Canoes or
Rowboats CG 24 16, which has been introduced in 2007 for that use.
When CG 24 16 is attached to a CGL coverage form issued to a
hotel or motel that has no pools or beaches, exclusion g. under
Coverage A is amended so as to not apply to bodily injury or property
damage arising out of any canoe or rowboat owned, or used by, or
rented to the insured. Section II—Who Is an Insured also is amendedto include as an insured any person or organization legally
responsible for the use of any canoe or rowboat the named insured
owns, provided the actual use by that person or organization is with
the named insured’s permission.
CG 24 17 Contractual Liability—Railroads
As explained in Chapter 1, the CGL definition of “insured contract”
does not include a contract or agreement that indemnifies a railroad
for bodily injury or property damage resulting from construction or
demolition operations on or within fifty feet of railroad property.
However, this limitation can be deleted by attaching endorsement CG
24 17.
The purpose of the endorsement is to provide contractual liability
coverage, under a contractor’s CGL policy, for liability that the
contractor assumes under a contract in which the contractor agrees
to hold harmless or indemnify a railroad. Whether this endorsement,
which can provide sole or partial fault coverage of the railroad, is
permissible, however, will hinge on the applicability of any anti-
indemnity statute. The usual steps having to do with contractual
liability (and additional insured coverage) is to (1) read the contract
specifications, (2) determine the nature of the contractual
assumption, (3) determine whether an anti-indemnity statute applies
and its restrictions, and (4) the kind of coverage required. If sole or
partial fault is void and unenforceable but the statute does not affect
the validity of insurance, this is the endorsement that should be
issued. Otherwise, the more limited endorsement CG 24 27 will have
to suffice.
CG 24 18 Seed Merchants—Coverage for Erroneous
Delivery or Mixture and Resulting Failure of Seed to
GerminateThis endorsement, introduced with the 1996 CGL revision, is
designed to be added to a CGL policy covering a seed merchant
classified for rating purposes as “Seed Merchants—N OC” (class
code 16891). The endorsement makes it clear that the policy will
cover erroneous delivery of seed, errors in mechanical mixture of
seeds, and failure of seed to germinate if the failure to germinate
results from 1) delivery of wrong seed, 2) delivery of seed at the
wrong time or season, or 3) an error in mechanical mixture of seed.
Liability coverage for Seed Merchants is a specialized form of
protection that is available by endorsement to the CGL policy.
Actually, three different endorsements are available and they need to
be issued in conjunction with the products/completed operations
coverage part. Two of these endorsements CG 24 18 and CG 24 19
are available by attachment to the CGL coverage part, whereas the
third endorsement CG 24 20 is issued when products/completed
operations coverage is written under a separate coverage part. Both
endorsements CG 24 18 and CG 24 20 offer the same coverage,
which is for loss from erroneous delivery or mixture and resulting
failure of seed to germinate, whereas endorsement CG 24 19 does
not provide coverage for loss from failure of seed to germinate.
Considering the nature of coverages offered by these
endorsements, their intent needs to be fully understood or disputes
can develop. A lawsuit wherein the insured was provided coverage
similar to the ISO standard endorsements covering failure to
germinate is Delta & Pine Land Company v. Nationwide
Agribusiness Company, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, 530
F.3d 395 (2008).
Delta & Pine Land Company (DPL) developed, marketed, and
sold cotton seed to farmers to be used for the purpose of raising and
selling cotton. In 2002, fifty-six individual farmers filed suit against
DPL alleging that they had suffered substantial losses in crop yields
because DPL sold them a mixture of old NuCotn 33 B cotton seednegligently blended with new seed. DPL maintained both CGL and
umbrella liability policies issued by Nationwide.
When served with the farmers’ complaint, DPL filed a declaratory
judgment action against its insurer for both defense and
indemnification. The district court ultimately granted summary
judgment in favor of the insurer on the ground that the claims
asserted by the farmers were not covered either under the CGL
policy or the umbrella liability policy. An appeal was made to the
United States Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals.
Peering into the coverage itself, the court noted that the CGL
policy was amended by a Seed Merchants endorsement, which
stated in part that damages because of property damage also
included “loss resulting from … an error in mechanical mixture of
seed”. The way DPL viewed this endorsement, it enlarged coverage
of the policy by expanding covered property damage to include
losses resulting from an error in mechanical mixture of seed. The
insurer, on the other hand, read the endorsement to still mandate that
a claim must be for property damage as originally defined by the
unendorsed CGL policy.
The appeals court, however, stated that the insurer’s view did not
logically follow and, in fact, would make the endorsement a
meaningless and ineffectual provision. The court went on to say that,
since DPL presented a reasonable reading of the endorsement, that
reading would have to be adopted so as to resolve any ambiguity or
doubt in favor of the insured. Since the farmers alleged a loss caused
by a negligent, and therefore erroneous, mixing of seed, the court
said it read the endorsement as providing coverage, thereby
triggering the insurer’s duty to defend DPL against the farmers’ suit.
Turning to the umbrella policy, the court held that coverage
likewise applied for the same reasons the CGL policy was held to beapplicable for the defense of the insured, notwithstanding the policy’s
more limited definition of property damage.
The insurer, however, also felt that two exclusions applied but
could not convince the court of their application. These involved the
(1) Expected or Intended Injury Exclusion; and the (2) Your Product
Exclusion.
The reason the first exclusion was held to be inapplicable by the
court was that the exclusion applied to property damage expected or
intended from the standpoint of the insured. The farmers, however,
primarily asserted damages resulting from the negligent or grossly
negligent mixing of seed and not damages resulting from intentional
injury. Turning to the second exclusion, the insurer argued that a
decreased crop yield was damage to DPL’s own product, the cotton
seed, and, therefore, was excluded. The court, however, disagreed,
explaining that it read the exclusion as not applying to the situation.
The farmers, the court explained, did not complain of damage to
DPL’s seed but, instead, for damage to the farmers’ crop land use,
i.e., their crop yield. While the seed was DPL’s product, the court
said, the resulting crop and its use of the crop land were the farmers’
separate property.
The court’s conclusion was that the endorsements to the CGL and
umbrella liability policies provided coverage to the extent of imposing
a duty to defend against the farmers’ claims and that none of the
exclusions applied. The court did, however, state that whether the
insurer had an obligation to indemnify was premature.
CG 24 19 Seed Merchants—Coverage for Erroneous
Delivery or Mixture (Resulting Failure of Seed to
Germinate Not Included)This endorsement, like CG 24 18, was introduced with the 1996
CGL revision. Endorsement CG 24 19 is used with CGL policies
covering seed merchants classified as “Seed Merchants—excluding
germination failure” (class code 16892). The endorsement provides
the same coverage as CG 24 18, minus coverage for resulting failure
of seed to germinate.
CG 24 22 Amendment of Coverage Territory—
Worldwide Coverage; CG 24 23 Amendment of
Coverage Territory—Additional Scheduled Countries;
and CG 24 24 Amendment of Coverage Territory—
Worldwide Coverage with Specified Exceptions
These three endorsements for broadening the regular CGL
coverage territory (discussed in Chapter 1) were introduced with the
2001 CGL revision. All three endorsements contain several
boilerplate conditions concerning suits outside the United States,
Puerto Rico, or Canada, which will not be described here. Apart from
these conditions, each endorsement takes a different approach to
expanding the coverage territory, as described below.
Endorsement CG 24 22 defines the coverage territory as
“anywhere in the world with the exception of any country or
jurisdiction which is subject to trade or other economic sanction or
embargo by the United States of America.” This is the broadest
coverage territory of the three.
Endorsement CG 24 23 defines the coverage territory in the same
way as in the CGL coverage forms plus “any other country specified
in the Schedule of this endorsement.”
Endorsement CG 24 24 defines the coverage territory as
anywhere in the world except (1) the countries specifically listed in
the endorsement’s schedule, and (2) any country subject to trade orother economic sanction or embargo by the United States. However,
the worldwide coverage extensions provided by the coverage territory
definition in the CGL coverage forms still apply under this modified
definition. (The worldwide coverage extensions relate to products,
persons temporarily away from the United States or Canada, and
personal and advertising injury offenses committed through the
Internet.)
As discussed in Chapter 1, products made in foreign countries
and imported for use or sale in the United States or other countries
can present a problem, unless one of these endorsements is issued
or a foreign products liability policy is issued. The reason is that the
CGL coverage form requires not only injury or damage during the
policy period, but also an occurrence within the coverage territory. An
important question that is sometimes difficult to answer is: Where did
the occurrence of a defective product take place? In the United
States or in some other country? If the latter, does the named insured
have some kind of worldwide coverage?
Note that the three coverage territories endorsements—C G 24
22, CG 24 23, and CG 24 24—have been revised. The revision
affects the so-called alpha numeric paragraph designators of the
Other Insurance Condition in the CGL coverage forms. These
endorsements are being revised to maintain consistency with the
changes made in the Other Insurance Condition noted in multistate
filing GL-2006-OCTFR. There is no impact on coverage according to
ISO.
CG 24 25 Limited Fungi or Bacteria Coverage
As the title of this endorsement (which was introduced in 2002)
connotes, coverage on a limited basis is offered, but solely for bodily
injury and property damage; personal and advertising injury is
specifically excluded to the same extent as in endorsement CG 2167. This limited coverage endorsement is subject to a separate
aggregate limit.
CG 24 25 was revised in 2004 to make an editorial revision
concerning the limits of insurance section of the CGL form. Thus,
coverage is available in light of this endorsement but only if, and to
the extent that, limits are available under the aggregate limit. As a
result of this amendment, it should be clearer that the policy’s limits
applicable to other coverages would continue to apply to losses
arising out of fungi or bacteria incidents, but only when the fungi and
bacteria liability aggregate has not been exhausted.
CG 24 26 Amendment of Insured Contract Definition
This endorsement was introduced as part of a July, 2004 filing by
ISO along with revisions involving additional insured endorsements. It
is a tool for underwriters who want to exclude coverage for tort
liability assumed under a contract (other than those types of
contracts specifically listed under paragraphs a. through e. of the
policy definition of insured contract) when the indemnitor (the one who
agrees to hold the indemnitee harmless) or anyone acting on the
indemnitor’s behalf does not cause, in whole or in part, the injury or
damage involved. According to Commercial Lines Manual Rule
36.C.22, this endorsement may be issued in conjunction with an
additional insured endorsement when applicable. This means that CG
24 26 could be issued whether or not an additional insured
endorsement also is to be issued.
Some people may view this rule permitting the issuance of a more
limiting contractual coverage endorsement as being unfair until they
realize how often some underwriters have been issuing CG 21 39,
contractual liability limitation endorsement, which completely
eliminates coverage for tort liability assumptions under any contractother than the specific types of contracts listed in paragraphs a.
through e. of the policy definition of insured contract.
Actually, either one of these limiting endorsements may generate
problems in those seven states that have no anti-indemnity statutes,
and in an additional twenty-seven states that hold sole fault or
sole/partial assumptions of liability to be unenforceable, unless
insurance is in place to cover them. Most of these statutes also
prescribe the type of acceptable insurer covering the hold harmless
agreement. Some of these statutes refer to an admitted insurer,
others to an authorized insurer, and still others to a licensed insurer.
Insurance, furthermore, does not mean self-insurance. A hold
harmless agreement by a self-insurer, therefore, will be void and
unenforceable in any one of the twenty-seven states having an
insurance exception, recognizing that self-insurance is not considered
to be insurance.
A case in point is USX Corporation v. Liberty Mutual Insurance
Company and Turner Construction Company, 645 N.E.2d 396 (App.
Ct. Ill., 1994). The general contractor here asked to be an additional
insured and to be covered for its hold harmless agreement with the
subcontractor who was a qualified self-insurer. Upon being sued by
the subcontractor’s employee, the general contractor sought
coverage from the subcontractor. While the state’s anti-indemnity
statute held sole fault assumptions of liability to be void and
unenforceable, it at the time made an exception for insurance by an
admitted insurer. The problem was that because the subcontractor
was self-insured, no insurance was in place to meet that state
statute’s exception.
Currently, CG 24 26 and CG 24 27 (discussed next) are issued
when the intent is to reduce the degree of coverage having to do with
contractual liability. Without these endorsements, the contractual
liability coverage of the CGL coverage form could provide coverage
for the sole fault of an indemnitee, if sole fault were required in acontract or agreement and not held to be void and unenforceable
under an anti-indemnification statute. So when these endorsements
are issued, coverage for sole fault is reduced to partial fault of the
indemnitee. In other words, the bodily injury or property damage must
be caused in whole or in part by the named insured or by those acting
on behalf of the named insured. This coverage has been in existence
for several years.
ISO has stated, with reference to the current revision, that over
the past few years, several states have enacted anti-indemnification
laws, with exceptions, having to do with construction contracts
dealing with sole fault assumptions. In response to these changes,
CG 24 26 and CG 24 27 are revised with an additional provision. The
additional provision states that the partial fault coverage is considered
an insured contract only if such assumption is prescribed by contract
or agreement and is otherwise permitted by law. In other words, it
could turn out where the most coverage provided is for the vicarious
liability of the indemnitee. This could occur if the contract does not
require the assumption of the indemnitee’s tort liability by the
indemnitor.
A number of states have anti-indemnity statutes that hold sole
and/or partial fault assumptions to be void and unenforceable, unless
insurance is written with an admitted or authorized insurer. Also,
some states do not have anti-indemnity statutes. Admittedly, many
entities do not ask for sole fault assumptions. But those who do, and
where this is otherwise permitted by law, would not receive that
broad coverage in light of endorsements CG 24 26 and CG 24 27.
What happens then is that the indemnitors (named insured) could be
confronted with an allegation of failure to procure or breach of
contract.
Note that another change that affects endorsement CG 24 26 is
that it now also applies to the Products/Completed Operations
Coverage Parts, in addition to the CGL Coverage Parts.CG 24 27 Limited Contractual Liability—Railroads
This endorsement, effective in many states in March 2005,
provides coverage similar to that provided by endorsement CG 24
17, except that as this endorsement’s title connotes, it is limited in
scope. Specifically, coverage will be limited to injury or damage that
is caused in whole or in part by the named insured or those acting on
behalf of the named insured. Especially important is that coverage will
not be provided for injury or damage arising out of the sole
negligence of the railroad.
Considering how demanding some railroads are when work is
being performed on or near their property, care must be exercised
that this endorsement is not issued when endorsement CG 24 17
should apply instead. It probably would behoove railroads to specify
what they want in contracts, and confirm the coverages requested
instead of simply accepting a certificate of insurance without some
warning.
As noted previously, the same revision that changed CG 24 26
also applies to CG 24 27. However, CG 24 27 does not apply to the
Products/Completed Operations coverage forms.
Amendment of Limits Endorsements
Four endorsements are available for amending the limits of
insurance in various ways.
CG 25 01 Amendment of Limits of Insurance
(Designated Projects or Premises)
Endorsement CG 25 01 modifies a CGL coverage form or an
OCP coverage form to provide amended limits at any project or
premises designated in the endorsement. This endorsement waswithdrawn from use with the 2004 CGL policy revisions, along with
endorsement CG 25 11, Amendment of Limits of Insurance
(Designated Projects or Premises) for use with the Owners and
Contractors Protective Liability policy. Both were withdrawn because
it was said by ISO that these endorsements were rarely used, since
it is an uncommon occurrence for a specific project to have a
separate limit of insurance.
CG 25 02 Amendment of Limits of Insurance
This endorsement replaces the limits shown in the policy
declarations with the limits shown in the endorsement.
CG 25 03 Designated Construction Project(s) General
Aggregate Limit
This endorsement was originally developed in connection with the
CGL policy simplification program under which a general aggregate
limit was introduced. The purpose of this endorsement was to enable
insured contractors in the construction business to meet their
contractual obligations to maintain separate amounts of liability
insurance for specific construction projects performed. This avoids a
situation where the general aggregate limit applicable to one
construction project could be eroded by claims at or from other
construction projects where the insured contractor might also be
engaged at the same time.
The endorsement was revised in 1997 to specifically set forth in
the language of the endorsement how the various aggregate limits
apply, with respect to each construction project of the insured,
whether or not the specific loss can be pinpointed to a specific
construction project. With this amendment, an insured will have
available for a premises-operations loss either the Designated
Construction Project Aggregate Limit, if the loss can be attributedsolely to a specific construction project, or the policy General
Aggregate Limit, if the loss cannot be attributed to a single
construction project. Thus, with this latest endorsement, a given
premises-operations claim will reduce only one General Aggregate
Limit; either the Designated Construction Project General Aggregate
Limit or the policy General Aggregate Limit, but not both.
CG 25 04 Designated Location(s) General Aggregate
Limit
ISO introduced this endorsement in connection with the CGL
policy simplification program, under which a general aggregate limit
was first introduced in 1986. This endorsement enabled insureds with
multiple locations to maintain separate amounts of liability insurance
for each such location. This avoided a situation where the general
aggregate limit applicable to one location could be eroded by losses
at or from other locations connected with the insured’s operations.
With the 1997 CGL policy amendments, this endorsement was
revised to set forth how the various aggregate limits are to apply with
respect to each location of the insured, whether or not the specific
claim can be attributed to a specific location. With this latest
endorsement, an insured will have available for a premises-operations
claim either the Designated Location General Aggregate Limit, if the
claim can be attributed solely to a specific location, or the policy
General Aggregate Limit, if the claim cannot be attributed to a single
location. Thus, with this revised endorsement, a given premises-
operations claim will reduce only one General Aggregate Limit; either
the Designated Location General Aggregate Limit or the policy
General Aggregate Limit, but not both.
CG 25 14 Designated Location(s) Aggregate LimitThis is a new endorsement intended to provide an additional
underwriting tool for insurers according to ISO. This endorsement is
for use with the Liquor Liability coverage forms. It makes a separate
designated location aggregate limit available for each location of the
insured listed in the schedule of the endorsement. CG 25 14 applies
with respect to losses that can be attributed only to the selling,
serving, or furnishing of alcoholic beverages from a single designated
location, while such losses that cannot be attributed to a single
location are subject to the policy aggregate limit instead.
Claims-Made Endorsements
The first four endorsements listed here and designed for use with
the claims-made CGL form only are the subject of extended
treatment in Chapter 4; only their form numbers and names are
shown below.
CG 27 02 Exclusion of Specific Accidents, Products,
Work, or Locations
CG 27 03 Amendment of Section V—Extended
Reporting Periods for Specific Accidents, Products,
Work, or Locations
CG 27 10 Supplemental Extended Reporting Period
CG 27 11 Supplemental Extended Reporting Period
Endorsement for Specific Accidents, Products, Work,
or Locations
CG 27 15 Extended Reporting Period Endorsement for
Employee Benefits Liability CoverageWith the 2001 CGL policy amendments, ISO introduced an
Employee Benefits Liability Coverage endorsement for use with the
CGL forms. This endorsement provides that an insured may purchase
an extended reporting period of five years for an additional premium.
Endorsement CG 27 15 is what provides that so-called tail coverage.
CG 31 73 Extended Reporting Period Endorsement for
Electronic Data Liability Coverage
This endorsement was introduced with the electronic data liability
coverage form in 2004. The endorsement can be used to add an
extended reporting period to this coverage form, which applies on a
claims-made basis. The extended reporting period covers claims first
made within three years after the policy expires. The claim must be
for electronic data loss that occurred before the end of the policy
period and on or after any applicable retroactive date applicable to
the policy. The endorsement does not increase or reinstate the limits
of insurance.
Other Endorsements
Various other endorsements are available for modifying the CGL
coverage forms. Examples of these endorsements are described
below.
CG 31 15 Construction Project Management Protective
Liability Coverage Endorsement
In 1997, the American Institute of Architects revised its General
Conditions of the Contract for Construction A 201 to add a provision
permitting the use of Project Management Protective Liability (PMPL)
Coverage in lieu of additional insured endorsements. There has been
only one insurer providing this coverage and its policy is not approved
in all states. However, if one were to compare this ProjectManagement Protective Liability Coverage with an Owners and
Contractors Protective Liability (OCP) policy, one would see a
marked similarity. The PMPL policy has since been withdrawn from
use, and its reference has also been removed from the American
Institute of Architects General Conditions Contract Form A 201.
When it comes to construction work, owners and contractors are
not keen on accepting an OCP policy even though it is a separate
policy for separate limits listing owners and contractors as the named
insureds. The problem is that coverage is limited to ongoing
operations, and sole fault coverage of the named insureds is limited
to their general supervision of the work. This is a problem when an
owner or general contractor is confronted with a third party action
and an allegation for failing to provide a safe place to work. The
question is whether such allegation can be equated with liability
emanating from general supervision.
It is doubtful that this endorsement is being requested, given its
few differences with the OCP policy. What is now problematic is what
coverage should be obtained, given that additional insured
endorsements covering sole fault are few in number. It could turn out
where contractual liability coverage offers the best protection. Much
will depend on the nature of the contractual assumption, the
applicability of any anti-indemnity statute and whether the CGL policy
is modified with one of the limiting endorsements, CG 21 39 or 24 26.
If neither of these is issued and sole or partial fault assumptions of
liability are permitted, contractual liability coverage may be the best
alternative, despite the problems over the way defense coverage is
handled, as mentioned in Chapter 1.
CG 31 74 Exclusion of Newly Acquired Organizations as
InsuredsThis endorsement was introduced with the 2004 revisions to be
used optionally in conjunction with the new product withdrawal
coverage form. When issued, this endorsement removes newly
acquired organizations from the Who Is an Insured section of the
product withdrawal coverage form. However, even if this
endorsement were to be issued, some coverage for the exposures of
newly acquired organizations would still remain because the form’s
definition of “your product” includes products manufactured, sold,
handled, distributed, or disposed of by a person or organization
whose business or assets the named insured has acquired.
CG 99 01 Motor Vehicle Laws
This endorsement was withdrawn with the 2004 CGL policy
revisions because mobile equipment subject to financial responsibility
laws, motor vehicle insurance laws, and similar laws will be
considered as autos instead of mobile equipment. Because not all
insurers will utilize the 2004/2007 CGL policy edition, particularly
those that write large fleets of mobile equipment, CG 99 01 will likely
still be used. The explanation of the withdrawn endorsement therefore
remains intact here for reference purposes.
This endorsement is added to CGL policies that have been
certified as proof of financial responsibility as required under the
provisions of a motor vehicle financial responsibility law. Although the
CGL coverage forms do not cover “autos,” they do cover “mobile
equipment” that in some cases may be subject to a state financial
responsibility law.
The endorsement states that bodily injury and property damage
liability insurance will comply with the provisions of the law to the
extent of the coverage and limits the law requires. In addition, the
insurer promises to provide, with respect to mobile equipment to
which the policy applies, any liability, uninsured motorists,underinsured motorists, no-fault, or other coverages required by any
motor vehicle insurance law, up to the limits required by the law.Miscellaneous Coverage Forms
ISO offers miscellaneous general liability coverage forms.
Because many insurance and risk management professionals may not
yet be completely familiar with these forms, the forms are briefly
described here.
CG 00 30 and CG 00 40
In the 2000 filing, ISO revised the Aircraft, Auto Or Watercraft
exclusion, along with the definitions of auto and mobile equipment to
exclude coverage for bodily injury and property damage arising out of
the ownership, maintenance or use of land vehicles that are subject to
a compulsory or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle law,
since such coverage is a better fit with the commercial auto policy.
According to ISO, although the changes made to the definition of auto
and mobile equipment would consider mobile equipment subject to
motor vehicle statutory requirements an auto, the operation of certain
mobile equipment would still be covered by the CGL policy. The
exception to the exclusion was revised to maintain coverage for the
operation of some mobile equipment, such as cherry pickers, under
the CGL. This revision, it was said, was incorporated into the
Pollution Liability Limited Coverage Form Designated Sites CG 00 40,
but not incorporated into the Pollution Liability Coverage Form
Designated Sites CG 00 39.
The purpose of the April 2013 revision is to change the Aircraft,
Auto, Rolling Stock, Or Watercraft exclusion in the pollution liability
coverage forms to address claims for negligence in the supervision,
hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others when such claims
involve injury or damage arising out of automobile use.
CG 00 35 Railroad Protective Liability Coverage FormBriefly, the purpose for this coverage form is to protect the
railroad when work is being performed on railroad property by
contractors. The railroad can obtain this insurance and charge it to
the contractor or the contractor can obtain it for the railroad. It is
similar in concept to the Owners and Contractors Protective Liability
Coverage Form, which means that coverage is on a primary basis but
is limited to operations in progress. Once the work is completed,
coverage ends.
The revisions of this coverage form center on the pollution liability.
When the revision of 2000 was introduced, the Railroad Insurance
Management Association requested that the same level of coverage
found under Pollution Exclusion Amendment endorsement CG 28 31
be provided. ISO therefore revised the exception to the pollution
exclusion of CG 00 35 to provide coverage for bodily injury or
property damage arising out of the escape of fuels or lubricants from
equipment used at the job location. CG 28 31 was said to generally
provide coverage for bodily injury or property damage arising out of
pollutants at or from the job location on which the insured or
contractors working for the insured were performing operations, if the
pollutants, other than fuels or lubricants for equipment used at the job
location, were brought onto the location in connection with the insured
operations. The April 2013 revision involves changing the pollution
exclusion again to expand the exception to the exclusion with respect
to bodily injury or property damage arising out of fuel or lubricants for
equipment used at the job location. The current edition of the form
reads as follows: Bodily injury or property damage arising out of fuels
or lubricants for equipment used at the job location.
One of the problems that still remains intact with this coverage
form concerns Coverage B—Physical Damage to Property. This form
defines “physical damage to property” to mean “direct and accidental
loss of or damage to … buildings”. While a contractor was working
on an old railroad tunnel, it collapsed causing extensive delay in trainservice not to speak of direct physical damage to the tunnel itself.
The insurer denied coverage because it maintained that a tunnel was
a structure, rather than a building. The court agreed. Since railroads
use many tunnels, this is an important exposure that needs to be
fixed. The case is Montana Rail Link, Inc. v. The Travelers Indemnity
Company, 2011 WL 578690.
CG 00 65 Electronic Data Liability Coverage Form
The CGL policy definition of property damage specifically
precludes electronic data as tangible property, and CGL exclusion p.
specifically precludes damages arising out of the loss of use of,
damage to, corruption of, inability to access, or inability to manipulate
electronic data. Accordingly, consideration should be given to
obtaining some coverage for the numerous electronic data exposures
that exist and that can result in serious losses.
As noted earlier, ISO has made available an electronic data
liability endorsement (CG 04 37), but it only applies to loss emanating
from physical injury to tangible property. This endorsement, for
example, might be suitable for an excavation contractor that severs a
fiber optic cable that causes loss of electronic data. It is not
adequate in a case, for example, where furniture movers drop a
heavy object going down stairs that, in a chain of events, causes
disruption of the business’s computer system. Unlike the electronic
data liability endorsement, the electronic data liability coverage form
covers both physical damage to tangible property and loss of use of
tangible property that is not physically damaged.
The coverage form’s insuring agreement resembles the Coverage
A insuring agreement of the CGL form, which (apart from applicable
exclusions) is broad enough to encompass liability for any act, error,
or omission. Closer scrutiny of the electronic data liability coverageform reveals that the insurance applies to loss of electronic data only
if caused by accident, negligent act, error, or omission.
CG 00 65 has ten exclusions. Among them is liability assumed
under any contract or agreement, other than liability the insured would
have in the absence of the contract or agreement; loss of electronic
data by the named insured or anyone acting on its behalf in providing
computer products or services (as defined in CG 00 65); damages
that are bodily injury, property damage, or personal and advertising
injury; a delay or failure to perform a contract or agreement; any
infringement of intellectual property rights; criminal or fraudulent acts;
and violation of an antitrust law.
The electronic data liability coverage form is written on a claims-
made basis. To extend the reporting period for three years, it is
necessary to attach CG 31 73, extended reporting period
endorsement for electronic data liability coverage, at a cost of 100
percent of the expiring coverage’s premium.
Note that there may be some problems with this form.
First, the term “electronic data incident” is defined to mean “an
accident, or a negligent act, error or omission … which results in a
loss of electronic data.” The CGL policy, on the other hand, covers
any act (intentional or unintentional), error or omission so long as the
resulting injury or damage is not intentional. CG 00 65, therefore,
limits coverage solely to unintentional acts.
A second problem is that this coverage form does not cover
damages that are bodily injury, property damage, or personal and
advertising injury. CG 00 65 coverage is limited to damages because
of loss of electronic data (a defined term). What is not encompassed
by this coverage form, therefore, are damages other than to
electronic data arising out of an electronic incident (a defined term).Another point to note is that, under the CGL forms filing of 2006,
ISO revised exclusion i. dealing with Infringement of Copyright,
Patent, Trademark or Trade Secret in CGL Coverage Forms CG 00
01 (occurrence) and CG 00 02 (claims-made). This change was said
to be introduced to reinforce the fact that the exclusion did not apply
to personal and advertising injury arising from the use of another’s
advertising idea in the named insured’s advertisement. At that time, a
similar revision was added to exclusion g., Infringement Of Intellectual
Property Rights in the Electronic Data Liability Coverage Form, CG
00 65; however, the revisions for 2013 delete this 2006 revision.
According to ISO, the Electronic Data Liability Coverage Form CG
00 65 generally provides coverage against damages because of loss
of electronic data that is caused by an electronic data incident. Since
the exception that was added to exclusion g. is said to have no
application to the coverage provided by this coverage form, the
exception is being deleted. The following phrase is being deleted:
“Under this exclusion, such other intellectual property rights do not
include the use of another’s advertising idea in your advertisement.”
CG 00 66 Product Withdrawal Coverage Form
The product withdrawal coverage form, introduced by ISO in
2004, consists of two primary coverage sections. The first is
Coverage A—product withdrawal expense, which is virtually identical
to the limited product withdrawal expense endorsement (CG 04 36),
discussed previously. The second section is Coverage B—product
withdrawal. This pays sums the insured is legally obligated to pay
and, therefore, will not only include the costs incurred by the insured
to withdraw or recall a product from the market or from use, but will
also pay others who have incurred those costs and seek
reimbursement from the insured.Both coverage sections of this form include tampering coverage,
which is considered to be a definite plus. Both also have a cut-off
date that serves almost like a retroactive date. In other words,
coverage is only going to apply to the sale of products produced after
the cut-off date designated in the declarations.
If Coverage B—product withdrawal is desired, an endorsement is
available to exclude the more limited Coverage A; the endorsement is
CG 31 68, exclusion—Coverage A—product withdrawal expense. If,
on the other hand, it is Coverage A that is desired, CG 31 69,
exclusion—Coverage B—product withdrawal liability needs to be
attached.
Coverage B, which also includes product replacement, repair, or
repurchase, is subject to fifteen exclusions: breach of warranty and
failure to conform to intended purpose; infringement of copyright,
patent, trade secret, trade dress, or trademark; deterioration,
decomposition, or chemical transformation; loss of goodwill, market
share, revenue, profit, or due to redesigning the product; expiration of
shelf life; known defect; governmental ban; fines and penalties;
intercompany lawsuits; contractual liability; pollution; pollution-related
(i.e., clean up) costs; war; loss of use of property; and bodily injury or
property damage.
One of the problems with this coverage form that could serve to
the detriment of insurers is that product withdrawal is a defined term
that includes recall. However, the governmental ban exclusion applies
to recalls, a term that is not separately defined. To correct this, the
insurer needs to substitute the defined term product withdrawal for
the term recall. A similar problem applies to Coverage B.
Two other endorsements are available for use with CG 00 66.
One is coverage extension—Coverage A—product restoration
expense, CG 31 72. If this endorsement is purchased, the insureragrees to reimburse the insured for the reasonable and necessary
costs directly related to withdrawal in order for the insured to regain
goodwill, market share, or profit, and for costs to redesign the named
insured’s product. This coverage, however, is subject to a sublimit.
The other endorsement is CG 31 74, exclusion of newly acquired
organizations as insureds. Interestingly, the definition of “your
product” on CG 00 66 means under clause 14.a.(3), a person or
organization whose business or assets the named insured has
acquired. So, if this exclusionary endorsement were to be issued, it
would appear that some coverage still remains intact.
Professional Services Exclusion
Endorsements
Currently, a number of endorsements are available to exclude
liability emanating from the rendering of, or failure to, professional
services. Despite these exclusions, it is sometimes possible to still
obtain coverage depending on the fact pattern and the exclusionary
wording. An example is the unpublished opinion in the case of Liberty
Life Ins. Co. v. Travelers Indemnity Co. of IL, 181 F.3d 88 (4th Cir.
1999), which ISO cites as the basis for another revision dealing with
the professional services exclusion.
In this case, the Court of Appeals considered whether a negligent
supervision claim was covered even though the act of the person
being supervised was found to be excluded. The underlying suit, in
part, was said to have sought damages from the insurer based on its
alleged negligence in the hiring, supervising and retaining of an
employee. The court held that the exclusions that barred coverage for
the claim against the employee, did not apply to this insurer in its
oversight role as the agent’s principal.In a 2001 revision of CGL provisions, ISO introduced language to
the exclusion applying to aircraft, auto or watercraft for claims
alleging negligence or other wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring,
employment, training or monitoring of others by an insured, if the
occurrence that caused the bodily injury or property damage involved
the ownership, maintenance, use, loading or unloading or entrustment
of any aircraft, auto or watercraft owned or operated by or rented or
loaned to any insured. To reinforce the professional services
exclusion, this same exclusionary wording is being added to the
following endorsements:
•    Exclusion—Designated Professional Services CG 21 16
•    Exclusion—Financial Services CG 21 52
•    Exclusion—Funeral Services CG 21 56
•    Exclusion—Counseling Services CG 21 57
•    Exclusion—Professional Veterinarian Services CG 21 58
•    Exclusion—Diagnostic Testing Laboratories CG 21 59
•    Exclusion—Inspection, Appraisal and Survey Companies CG
22 24
•    Exclusion—Professional Services Banks CG 22 32
•    Exclusion—Construction Management Errors And Omissions
CG 22 34
•    Exclusion—Products And Professional Services (Druggists)
•    Exclusion—Products And Professional Services (Optical And
Hearing Aid Establishments•    Exclusion—Camps Or Playgrounds CG 22 39
•    Exclusion—Engineers, Architects Or Surveyors Professional
Liability CG 22 43
•    Exclusion—Services Furnished By Health Care Providers CG
22 44
•    Exclusion—Specified Therapeutic Or Cosmetic Services
•    Exclusion—Insurance And Related Operations CG 22 48
•    Exclusion—Druggists CG 22 69
•    Exclusion—Colleges Or Schools (Limited Form) CG22 71
•    Exclusion—Colleges Or Schools CG 22 72
•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Computer Software CG 22
75
•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Health Or Exercise Clubs
Or Commercially Operated Health Or Exercise Facilities CG
22 76
•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Computer Data Processing
CG 22 77
•    Exclusion—Contractors—P rofessional Liability CG 22 79
•    Limited Exclusion—Contractors—P rofessional Liability CG
22 80
•    Exclusion—Adult Day Care Centers CG 22 87•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Electronic Data Processing
Services And Computer Consulting Or Programming
Services CG 22 88
•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Spas Or Personal
Enhancement Facilities CG 22 90
•    Exclusion—Telecommunication Equipment Or Service
Providers Errors And Omissions CG 22 91
•    Limited Exclusion—Personal And Advertising Injury—
Lawyers CG 22 96
•    Exclusion—Internet Services Providers And Internet Access
Providers CG 22 98
•    Professional Liability Exclusion—Website Designers CG 22
99
•    Exclusion—Real Estate Agents Or Brokers Errors Or
Omissions CG 23 01
•    Construction Projection Management Protective Liability
Coverage CG 31 15
Endnotes
1.      Copyright, ISO Properties, Inc., 2003.
2.      While the anti-indemnity statutes of many states hold void
and unenforceable both sole and partial fault assumptions,
they remain unaffected by the validity of insurance from, for
example, an admitted insurer or authorized insurer or licensed
insurer. When a named insured (indemnitor) assumes the sole
fault of an additional insured (indemnitee), there may be a
problem with the failure to procure proper coverage (breachof contract) when this ISO endorsement is issued because it
attempts to preclude sole fault coverage.
3.      States in this category are: Alaska, Arkansas, California,
Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi,
Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,
Ohio, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas,
Virginia, West Virginia.
4.      States in this category are Alabama, Maine, Nevada,
Pennsylvania, Vermont, Wisconsin and Wyoming.Chapter 7
Commercial Umbrella Liability
Insurance
An umbrella liability policy has a net effect of providing the insured
with an “umbrella” of liability protection over the insured’s primary
liability insurance. This approach to liability risk management has
attracted many insureds and insurers, and is now quite commonly
written for both large and small risks. These pages offer an
introduction to commercial umbrella liability insurance.
General Features
An umbrella liability policy can accomplish the following purposes:
providing coverage over the primary liability insurance carried by the
insured in the event that the primary insurance is exhausted by a loss;
providing coverage of liability exposures for which there is no primary
insurance or where the primary policy contains an exclusion which is
not similarly excluded under the umbrella policy. (More generally, the
umbrella policy is to protect the insured in the event of a catastrophic
loss wherein the loss exceeds the limits of liability in the primary
liability policy.) And in keeping with these purposes, most umbrella
insurers generally require the insureds to purchase primary insurance
coverage: general liability insurance, auto liability insurance, and
sometimes workers compensation and employers liability insurance.
Umbrella liability insurance policies are mostly not prescribed by
any rating or advisory organization. Umbrella underwriting rules arelargely a matter of the judgment of the insurer; and rating is almost
entirely a matter of individual judgment, not only from insurer to
insurer, but also varying with the individual risk.
While most umbrella policies do resemble one another in a broad,
general way, significant individual differences will be found from one
umbrella policy to the next. In fact, many of the umbrella provisions
are negotiable with most underwriters. Umbrella underwriting is highly
individualistic, and is quite responsive to individual risk differences and
to changing conditions. This is true as to specific risks or classes of
insureds as well as to general trends in underwriting profitability.
Consequently, significant differences will often be found even in the
provisions of the umbrella policies of the same insurer for different
insureds or classes or the same insured at different times. So it is
important that each umbrella policy be examined for its particular
provisions.
Among the many differences commonly encountered among
umbrella policies are the following:
•    definition of who is insured
•    coverage territory
•    limitations or restrictions on coverage, which may appear in
the coverage description, the definitions, the exclusions, or
the policy conditions
•    sublimits and use of aggregate limits
•    “pay on behalf” versus “reimbursement” insuring agreements
•    definition of bodily injury or personal injury, with some
policies including mental injury coverageIn general, an umbrella liability policy is written only for a risk that
has a broad and substantial program of underlying coverage—
insurers usually require commercial general liability and automobile
liability insurance with substantial bodily injury and property damage
limits. A requirement of underlying liability limits of $1,000,000 is not
uncommon. For insureds with severe advertising or other personal
injury, or other special liability exposures, underlying coverage with
high limits in these areas may also be required if these exposures are
to be included in the umbrella coverage.
Umbrella policy conditions usually call for maintenance of the
underlying coverage, with the umbrella insurer’s part in a loss being
determined as if the underlying contract were in force, even if it is not.
The exception—an important one—is where an underlying policy is
totally exhausted by payment of loss, in which case the umbrella
policy drops down to replace the exhausted underlying protection.
Note that drop down provisions usually exclude carrier bankruptcy
and the failure of the insured to maintain insurance as reasons for a
drop down.
Likewise, though there have been some fluctuations on this point,
insurers require that the amount of loss absorbed by the insured as
respects uninsured or self-insured exposures be a certain amount.
When the umbrella policy was first introduced, most umbrella
contracts were written with this amount—the “retention” or “drop
down” limit—at $25,000; however, the amount can now range from
zero dollars on up. Such flexibility in choice of retention limits no doubt
has had much to do with the increased activity in this field.
A significant point of variation has to do with defense coverage.
Practically all umbrella liability contracts have provisions that, in
effect, protect the right of the umbrella insurer to take over or
participate in the defense of a claim that may involve it. Most of the
original umbrella contracts did not provide any defense coverage with
respect to claims which appeared likely to stay within the retention.The tendency now, however, is to include defense coverage for
uninsured exposures even when loss does not appear likely to involve
the umbrella contract. Also, some contracts include defense coverage
of losses where, because the underlying insurance is exhausted by
loss payments, the umbrella policy comes in as primary coverage.
Another important difference is the inclusion of defense and appeal
costs within the limits of coverage in some umbrella policies, while
others provide them as supplementary payments outside the limits of
coverage.
Specific Features
An umbrella policy may have some specific features to contrast its
nature with primary insurance policies. (Note: the ISO commercial
liability umbrella policy, CU 00 01, is used here as an example of
specific umbrella features.)
The duty of the umbrella insurer to defend the insured has been
mentioned. There is a clause in the ISO commercial liability insurance
policy pertaining to the transfer of defense from the primary insurer to
the umbrella insurer when the underlying limits of insurance have been
used up in the payment of judgments or settlements.
ERISA claims and employment-related practices claims are
usually excluded from coverage under the umbrella policy.
Coverage for claims arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or
use of covered autos is included in the umbrella policy along with the
general liability coverage.
Any additional insured under any policy of underlying insurance will
automatically be an insured under the umbrella policy. Such coverage
is not broader than coverage provided by the underlying insurance.If the underlying insurer or the insured elects not to appeal a
judgment in excess of the retained limit, the umbrella insurer reserves
the right to do so at its own expense. The umbrella insurer will also
pay for taxable court costs, pre- and post-judgment interest and
disbursements associated with the appeal.
The umbrella policy requires the insured to maintain underlying
insurance in full effect without reduction of coverage or limits (except
for the reduction of the aggregate limits that results from payment of
claims, settlements, or judgments). The failure to maintain underlying
insurance will not invalidate insurance provided by the umbrella policy,
but the umbrella coverage applies as if the underlying insurance were
in full effect.
Retained limit, self-insured retention, ultimate net loss, and
underlying insurance are all terms that are defined in the umbrella
policy since these terms are pertinent to the insuring agreements,
exclusions, and conditions in the umbrella policy.
Umbrella Coverage Issues
Among the coverage disputes that can be peculiar to umbrella
policies (and excess policies) are questions about “indemnity versus
pay-on-behalf of” language in the insuring agreements and “drop
down” coverage.
Policies that indemnify the insured do not require the insurer to
make payment to the insured until the insured has first made payment
for covered damages or expenses. In other words, the language
requires the insured to use his own funds to pay for damages and
defense and then seek reimbursement from the insurer. Under the
pay-on-behalf-of language, the insurer promises to pay damages on
behalf of the insured. This means that the insured does not have to
first make payment and then seek reimbursement from the insurer.Expenses for defense are normally paid by the insurer as they are
incurred if the umbrella insurer has taken over the defense role.
Note that some umbrella policies do not contain language such as
“indemnify” or “pay-on-behalf-of”. Instead, such policies provide that
the insurer will “pay the loss” or will “pay those sums the insured is
legally obligated to pay”. This means that the umbrella insurer will pay
the amounts owed by the insured, or basically, will pay on behalf of
the insured. In the actual payment practices of umbrella insurers,
there may be little difference between “indemnify”, “pay-on-behalf-of”,
or “pay the loss” policies. However, an insured clearly would be
better off with the other-than-indemnify language.
As for drop down coverage, this usually comes into play when the
primary carrier becomes insolvent and this affects excess coverage.
By definition and longstanding principles, excess liability insurance
comes into play not until all other valid insurance has been exhausted
in paying a loss. However, if the primary limits have not been
exhausted due to payment of claims, but rather, are not available to
apply to existing claims due to the insolvency of the primary carrier, is
the excess insurer required to fill the void and drop down to pay the
sums that the insured has become legally obligated to pay? Legal
opinion is split rather simply into those that favor drop down and
those that do not. The overwhelming majority opinion is that the
insolvency of the primary carrier does not mean that the insured’s
excess carrier has to drop down to primary coverage. (Note that the
ISO commercial liability umbrella policy specifically states that its
insurance will not replace the underlying insurance in the event of
bankruptcy or insolvency of the underlying insurer. The umbrella
insurance applies as if the underlying insurance were in full effect.)
As an example of judicial opinion, the Supreme Court of Louisiana
held that the umbrella policy did not drop down to provide dollar one
coverage after the insolvency of the primary insurer. This case isHuggins v. Gerry Lane Enterprises, Inc., 957 So.2d 127 (2007). The
Court said that the umbrella insurer was liable only for the ultimate
net loss in excess of applicable limits of scheduled underlying
insurance. Another example is Highlands Insurance Company v.
Gerber Products Company, 702 F.Supp. 109 (1988) wherein the
United States District Court in Maryland said that “excess carriers
ordinarily are not required to provide drop down coverage in the event
of the insolvency of an underlying insurer. An exception to this general
rule exists only where an insurer has used language in its policy that
creates a genuine ambiguity as to the scope of coverage”. This
thinking was reiterated in another case from a U.S. District Court,
McGirt v. Royal Insurance Company of America, 399 F.Supp.2d 655
(2005).
Of course, there are judicial decisions that favor drop down
coverage but those are usually based on the ambiguity of the policy
language. The policies in those cases contained terms like “amount
recoverable” or “amount collectible” and the courts construed the
terms as ambiguous, resulting in decisions favorable to the insured.
So, conversely, where policy terms refer to a fixed amount of primary
coverage or declare that exhaustion of underlying limits of insurance
is only payment of claims, courts will limit the liability of excess
insurers to the amount in excess of the specified underlying limit; in
other words, no drop down. As an example of the need for insurers
to insert explicit language into umbrella liability policies, see
Domingue v. Legion Indemnity Company, 918 So.2d 1213 (2006). In
that case, the policy required the underlying insurance to be available
“regardless of the bankruptcy or insolvency of the underlying insurer”.
Based on that language, the Louisiana court of appeals said “there is
clearly no drop down under this policy provision since the collectability
of the underlying insurance was not available due to Legion’s
insolvency”.Chapter 8
Commercial Liability Umbrella
Policy
Insurance Services Office (ISO) has developed a commercial
liability umbrella form. The coverage is excess over commercial
general liability and automobile liability coverages. The Commercial
Liability Umbrella Form, CU 00 01 04 13, provides coverage when
aggregate limits of underlying insurance—that is, any policies of
insurance listed in the declarations under the schedule of underlying
insurance—are exhausted. A self-insured retention applies to
exposures not covered by underlying insurance.
This chapter presents a general overview and analysis of CU 00
01. The sections of the form are reproduced here, followed by an
analysis of that section. The form itself is reproduced in the appendix
of this coverage guide.
Coverage A—Bodily Injury and Property
Damage Liability
1.    Insuring Agreement
a.    We will pay on behalf of the insured the “ultimate net
loss” in excess of the “retained limit” because of “bodily
injury” or “property damage” to which this insurance
applies. We will have the right and duty to defend the
insured against any “suit” seeking damages for such“bodily injury” or “property damage” when the
“underlying insurance” does not provide coverage or
the limits of “underlying insurance” have been
exhausted. When we have no duty to defend, we will
have the right to defend, or to participate in the
defense of, the insured against any other “suit” seeking
damages to which this insurance may apply. However,
we will have no duty to defend the insured against any
“suit” seeking damages for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” to which this insurance does not apply. At our
discretion, we may investigate any “occurrence” that
may involve this insurance and settle any resultant
claim or “suit”, for which we have the duty to defend.
But:
(1)    The amount we will pay for the “ultimate net loss”
is limited as described in Section III—Limits Of
Insurance; and
(2)    Our right and duty to defend ends when we have
used up the applicable limit of insurance in the
payment of judgments or settlements under
Coverages A or B.
No other obligation or liability to pay sums or
perform acts or services is covered unless
explicitly provided for under Supplementary
Payments—C overages A or B.
b.    This insurance applies to “bodily injury” or “property
damage” that is subject to an applicable “retained
limit”. If any other limit, such as a sublimit, is specified
in the “underlying insurance”, this insurance does not
apply to “bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out
of that exposure unless that limit is specified in theDeclarations under the Schedule of “underlying
insurance”.
c.    This insurance applies to “bodily injury” and “property
damage” only if:
(1)    The “bodily injury” or “property damage” is
caused by an “occurrence” that takes place in the
“coverage territory”;
(2)    The “bodily injury” or “property damage” occurs
during the policy period; and
(3)    Prior to the policy period, no insured listed under
Paragraph 1 of Section II—Who Is An Insured
and no “employee” authorized by you to give or
receive notice of an “occurrence” or claim, knew
that the “bodily injury” or “property damage” had
occurred, in whole or in part. If such a listed
insured or authorized “employee” knew, prior to
the policy period, that the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” occurred, then any
continuation, change or resumption of such “bodily
injury” or “property damage” during or after the
policy period will be deemed to have been known
prior to the policy period.
d.    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which occurs
during the policy period and was not, prior to the policy
period, known to have occurred by any insured listed
under Paragraph 1. of Section II—Who Is An Insured
or any “employee” authorized by you to give or receive
notice of an “occurrence” or claim, includes any
continuation, change or resumption of that “bodilyinjury” or “property damage” after the end of the policy
period.
e.    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” will be deemed to
have been known to have occurred at the earliest time
when any insured listed under Paragraph 1. of Section
II—Who Is An Insured or any “employee” authorized by
you to give or receive notice of an “occurrence” or
claim:
(1)    Reports all, or any part, of the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” to us or any other insurer;
(2)    Receives a written or verbal demand or claim for
damages because of the “bodily injury” or
“property damage”; or
(3)    Becomes aware by any other means that “bodily
injury” or “property damage” has occurred or has
begun to occur.
f.     Damages because of “bodily injury” include damages
claimed by any person or organization for care, loss of
services or death resulting at any time from the “bodily
injury”.
The language of this insuring agreement is essentially the same as
that of the standard Commercial General Liability (CGL) coverage
form, with a few exceptions in terms.
As an example, under the terms of the umbrella policy, the insurer
agrees to pay the ultimate net loss in excess of the retained limit
because of bodily injury or property damage to which the insurance
applies. “Ultimate net loss” is a defined term on the policy, as is
“retained limit,” and both terms are unique to an umbrella policy. Theultimate net loss is the total sum, after reduction for recoveries or
salvages collectible, that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay
by reason of settlement or judgments or any arbitration or other
alternate dispute method entered into with the consent of the
umbrella insurer or the underlying insurer. The retained limit is the
available limits of underlying insurance scheduled in the declarations
or the self-insured retention, whichever applies.
In other words, the ultimate net loss is the amount the insured,
and hence, the umbrella insurer, has to pay for the claim(s)
successfully made against the insured. The retained limit is the limit of
insurance that the underlying insurance policy provides to the insured
for coverage of the claim(s) made against him. Note that under the
terms of the umbrella policy, the self-insured retention is the dollar
amount that will be paid by the insured before the umbrella insurance
becomes applicable only with respect to occurrences or offenses that
are not covered by the underlying insurance. This is logical because if
the underlying insurance policies offer coverage for a liability
exposure facing the insured, having a Self-Insured Retention (SIR)
also apply to the exposure would give the umbrella insurer a double
layer of protection. (The SIR does not apply to occurrences or
offenses that would have been covered by the underlying insurance
but for the exhaustion of applicable limits.)
The umbrella policy insuring agreement also stipulates that the
insurer has the right and duty to defend when the underlying
insurance is exhausted or not applicable. In other words, the duty to
defend is primarily on the shoulders of the underlying primary carrier.
However, the umbrella insurer will step in to defend the insured when
the underlying coverage limits of insurance have been used up in the
payment of judgments or settlements, or when the underlying
insurance simply does not apply to the claim or lawsuit. And, the
liability umbrella insuring agreement does declare that when the
insurer has no duty to defend, it does have the right to defend or to
participate in the defense of the insured. This is to make sure that theinterests of the umbrella insurer are not ignored or compromised
when the underlying insurance carrier assumes the defense of the
insured and the settlement of the lawsuit.
Note that the umbrella policy also states, like the CGL form, that it
will not provide coverage for bodily injury or property damage that
was known by an insured to have occurred prior to the policy period.
This is a reaction to the Montrose Chemical Corporation decision
from California. The follow-up clauses in this insuring agreement
make it clear that the insurer wants to clarify when bodily injury or
property damage is deemed to have been known by an insured. The
first two paragraphs in clause are self-explanatory and could easily
be proven. However, the third paragraph is rather broad in scope and
could be problematic should an insurer try to prove when and if an
insured somehow “becomes aware” of bodily injury or property
damage.
Coverage A Exclusions
Exclusions
This insurance does not apply to:
a.    Expected or Intended Injury
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” expected or
intended from the standpoint of the insured. This
exclusion does not apply to “bodily injury” resulting from
the use of reasonable force to protect persons or
property.
b.    Contractual Liability
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” for which the
insured is obligated to pay damages by reason of theassumption of liability in a contract or agreement. This
exclusion does not apply to liability for damages:
(1)    That the insured would have in the absence of the
contract or agreement; or
(2)    Assumed in a contract or agreement that is an
“insured contract”, provided the “bodily injury” or
“property damage” occurs subsequent to the
execution of the contract or agreement. Solely for
the purposes of liability assumed in an “insured
contract”, reasonable attorney fees and
necessary litigation expenses incurred by or for a
party other than an insured are deemed to be
damages because of “bodily injury” or “property
damage”, provided:
(a)    Liability to such party, for, or for the cost of,
that party’s defense has also been assumed
in the same “insured contract”; and
(b)    Such attorney fees and litigation expenses
are for defense of that party against a civil
or alternative dispute resolution proceeding
in which damages to which this insurance
applies are alleged.
c.    Liquor Liability
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” for which any
insured may be held liable by reason of:
(1)    Causing or contributing to the intoxication of any
person;(2)    The furnishing of alcoholic beverages to a person
under the legal drinking age or under the influence
of alcohol; or
(3)    Any statute, ordinance or regulation relating to
the sale, gift, distribution or use of alcoholic
beverages.
This exclusion applies even if the claims against
any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing
in:
(a)    The supervision, hiring, employment,
training or monitoring of others by that
insured; or
(b)    Providing or failing to provide transportation
with respect to any person that may be
under the influence of alcohol;
if the “occurrence” which caused the “bodily injury”
or “property damage” involved that which is
described in Paragraph (1), (2) or (3) above.
However, this exclusion applies only if you are in
the business of manufacturing, distributing, selling,
serving or furnishing alcoholic beverages. For the
purposes of this exclusion, permitting a person to
bring alcoholic beverages on your premises, for
consumption on your premises, whether or not a
fee is charged or a license is required for such
activity, is not by itself considered the business of
selling, serving or furnishing alcoholic beverages.
This exclusion does not apply to the extent that
valid “underlying insurance” for the liquor liability
risks described above exists or would haveexisted but for the exhaustion of underlying limits
for “bodily injury” and “property damage”. To the
extent this exclusion does not apply, the insurance
provided under this Coverage Part for the liquor
liability risks described above will follow the same
provisions, exclusions and limitations that are
contained in the applicable “underlying insurance”
unless otherwise directed by this insurance.
These exclusions are the same as exclusions a, b, and c of the
CGL coverage form.
However, note that the liquor liability exclusion in this umbrella
policy does not apply if liquor liability is covered in an underlying
policy, that is, the exclusion does not apply to the extent that valid
underlying insurance for the liquor liability risks exists or would have
existed but for the exhaustion of underlying limits. If that is the case,
the umbrella coverage will follow the provisions, exclusions, and
limitations of the underlying insurance.
This liquor liability exclusion was revised by ISO in 2013 to
address Bring Your Own (BYO) establishments. Some restaurants
allow customers to bring their own bottles of alcohol into the
premises and then charge a corkage fee and require that the
beverages be poured and served by restaurant employees. This
raised the question as to whether such practices are subject to the
liquor liability exclusion. To address this issue, ISO added the
following language to the exclusion: “permitting a person to bring
alcoholic beverages on your premises, for consumption on your
premises, whether or not a fee is charged or a license is required for
such activity, is not by itself considered the business of selling,
serving or furnishing alcoholic beverages.” Thus, since the liquor
liability exclusion applies only if the insured is in the business of
manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic
beverages, this language allows coverage for a BYO situation.ISO also reviewed the following court decisions regarding liquor
liability in liability policies for the 2013 revision:
Penn-America Ins. Co. v. Peccadillos, 27 A.3d 259 (Pa. Super.
2011): the court in this case found that a CGL policy’s duty to defend
is triggered when an insured allegedly continued to sell alcohol to
visibly intoxicated customers, who the insured then ejected from its
premises. The customers drove away from the establishment and
caused an accident that resulted in deaths drivers and passengers in
other vehicles.
McGuire v. Curry, 766 N.W.2d 501 (S.D. 2009): In this case, the
court ruled that an employer can be held liable for actions of
underage employees if the employer allowed them unsupervised and
unrestricted access to alcoholic beverages. The court found that the
employer had a duty to supervise the underage employee.
Essex Ins. Co. v. Cafe Dupont, LLC, 674 F.Supp. 2d 166 (D.D.C.
2009): The court found that a provision in a CGL policy that excluded
damages or injuries arising out of any act or omission by the insured
or the insured’s employees regarding failure to provide transportation
or detaining or failing to detain any person or assuming or not
assuming responsibility for the well-being, care, or supervision of a
person under the influence of alcohol applied to any intoxicated
person, not just those who became intoxicated in the insured’s
establishment.
As a result of ISO’s review of these court decisions, the liquor
liability exclusion was revised to state that the exclusion applies even
if claims against the insured allege negligence in the supervision,
hiring, employment, training, or monitoring of others. The exclusion
also applies if negligence or wrongdoing in providing or failing to
provide transportation for any person under the influence of alcohol is
alleged.d.    Workers’ Compensation and Similar Laws
Any obligation of the insured under a workers’
compensation, disability benefits or unemployment
compensation law or any similar law.
e.    ERISA
Any obligation of the insured under the Employees’
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA), and
any amendments thereto or any similar federal, state
or local statute.
f.     Auto Coverages
(1)    “Bodily Injury” or “property damage” arising out of
the ownership, maintenance or use of any “auto”
which is not a “covered auto”; or
(2)    Any loss, cost, or expense payable under or
resulting from any first party physical damage
coverage; no-fault law; personal injury protection
or auto medical payments coverage; or uninsured
or underinsured motorist law.
g.    Employers Liability
“Bodily injury” to:
(1)    An “employee” of the insured arising out of and in
the course of:
(a)    Employment by the insured; or(b)    Performing duties related to the conduct of
the insured’s business; or
(2)    The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of
that “employee” as a consequence of Paragraph
(1) above.
This exclusion applies whether the insured may be
liable as an employer or in any other capacity, and to
any obligation to share damages with or repay
someone else who must pay damages because of the
injury.
This exclusion does not apply to liability assumed by
the insured under an “insured contract”.
With respect to injury arising out of a “covered auto”,
this exclusion does not apply to “bodily injury” to
domestic “employees” not entitled to workers’
compensation benefits. For the purposes of this
insurance, a domestic “employee” is a person engaged
in household or domestic work performed principally in
connection with a residence premises.
This exclusion does not apply to the extent that valid
“underlying insurance” for the employer’s liability risks
described above exists or would have existed but for
the exhaustion of underlying limits for “bodily injury”. To
the extent this exclusion does not apply, the insurance
provided under this Coverage Part for the employer’s
liability risks described above will follow the same
provisions, exclusions and limitations that are contained
in the applicable “underlying insurance” unless
otherwise directed by this insurance.h.    Employment-related Practices
“Bodily injury” to:
(1)    A person arising out of any:
(a)    Refusal to employ that person;
(b)    Termination of that person’s employment; or
(c)    Employment-related practices, policies,
acts or omissions, such as coercion,
demotion, evaluation, reassignment,
discipline, defamation, harassment,
humiliation or discrimination directed at that
person; or
(2)    The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister of
that person as a consequence of “bodily injury” to
that person at whom any of the employment-
related practices described in Paragraphs (a),
(b), or (c) above is directed.
This exclusion applies whether the injury-causing
event described in Paragraphs (a), (b), or (c)
above occurs before employment, during
employment, or after employment of that person.
This exclusion applies whether the insured may be
liable as an employer or in any other capacity, and
to any obligation to share damages with or repay
someone else who must pay damages because of
the injury.
This set of exclusions is not out of the ordinary. Workers
compensation, ERISA obligations, auto coverages, employers’liability, and employment-related practices are all areas typically not
covered by a general liability policy. What stands out here are the
exceptions that the umbrella policy makes.
For example, the auto exclusion applies to autos that are not
covered autos; that is, autos to which underlying insurance does not
apply. The umbrella policy does provide coverage for covered autos,
which is defined in CU 00 01 as only those autos to which underlying
insurance applies.
Also, domestic employees who do not qualify for workers
compensation insurance are not included in the exclusion with respect
to bodily injuries arising out of a covered auto. A domestic employee
is a person engaged in household or domestic work performed
principally in connection with a residence premises. For example, a
maid is injured in an auto accident due to the negligence of the
insured. The maid is not entitled to workers compensation based on
state law. This umbrella policy would not exclude coverage for the
insured if the insured became legally obligated to pay for the
damages suffered by the maid. The underlying auto policy of the
insured should, of course, act as the primary insurance, but if need
be, this umbrella policy would also apply to the claim.
As another example of an exception, the umbrella policy provides
coverage for employers liability risks on a follow-form basis if
coverage exists in an underlying policy.
i.     Pollution
(1)    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which would
not have occurred in whole or part but for the
actual, alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal,
seepage, migration, release or escape of
“pollutants” at any time; or(2)    “Pollution cost or expense”.
This exclusion does not apply if valid “underlying
insurance” for the pollution liability risks described
above exists or would have existed but for the
exhaustion of underlying limits for “bodily injury” and
“property damage”. To the extent this exclusion does
not apply, the insurance provided under this Coverage
Part for the pollution risks described above will follow
the same provisions, exclusions and limitations that are
contained in the “underlying insurance”, unless
otherwise directed by this insurance.
The umbrella contains an absolute pollution exclusion. There are
no stated exceptions as can be found on the CGL form. However, if
underlying coverage exists for pollution liability, the exclusion does not
apply.
j.     Aircraft or Watercraft
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, use or entrustment to others
of any aircraft or watercraft owned or operated by or
rented or loaned to any insured. Use includes operation
and “loading or unloading”.
This exclusion applies even if the claims against any
insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing in the
supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring
of others by that insured, if the “occurrence” which
caused the “bodily injury” or “property damage”
involved the ownership, maintenance, use or
entrustment to others of any aircraft or watercraft that
is owned or operated by or rented or loaned to any
insured.This exclusion does not apply to:
(1)    A watercraft while ashore on premises you own
or rent;
(2)    A watercraft you do not own that is:
(a)    Less than fifty feet long; and
(b)    Not being used to carry persons or property
for a charge;
(3)    Liability assumed under any “insured contract” for
the ownership, maintenance or use of aircraft or
watercraft.
(4)    The extent that valid “underlying insurance” for
the aircraft or watercraft liability risks described
above exists or would have existed but for the
exhaustion of underlying limits for “bodily injury” or
“property damage”. To the extent this exclusion
does not apply, the insurance provided under this
Coverage Part for the aircraft or watercraft risks
described above will follow the same provisions,
exclusions and limitations that are contained in the
“underlying insurance” unless otherwise directed
by this insurance; or
(5)    Aircraft that is:
(a)    Chartered by, loaned to, or hired by you
with a paid crew; and
(b)    Not owned by any insured.
k.    Racing Activities“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of the
use of “mobile equipment” or “autos” in, or while in
practice for, or while being prepared for, any
prearranged professional or organized racing, speed,
demolition, or stunting activity or contest.
 l.     War
“Bodily injury” or “property damage”, however
caused, arising, directly or indirectly, out of:
(1)    War, including undeclared or civil war;
(2)    Warlike action by a military force, including
action in hindering or defending against an
actual or expected attack, by any
government, sovereign or other authority
using military personnel or other agents; or
(3)    Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped
power, or action taken by governmental
authority in hindering or defending against
any of these.
The aircraft or watercraft exclusion does not mention autos
because, unlike the CGL policy, the umbrella policy does not exclude
bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, use, or entrustment of an auto owned or operated by,
rented, or loaned to any insured. As long as the underlying insurance
provides coverage for covered autos, the umbrella policy follows
form. For that matter, the umbrella policy does extend coverage to
aircraft and watercraft liability risks that underlying insurance covers,
or would cover but for the exhaustion of underlying limits for bodily
injury or property damage.The umbrella also broadens watercraft coverage by increasing the
specified size limitation found in the CGL form from less than twenty-
six to less than fifty feet long; of course, the watercraft is not covered
under either the CGL form or the umbrella policy if it is used to carry
persons or property for a charge or owned by the named insured. As
for aircraft coverage, the umbrella policy does apply to nonowned
aircraft that is chartered by, loaned to, or hired by the named insured
with a paid crew.
The war exclusion reflects the major rewording of that exclusion
after the attack on the World Trade Center. The war exclusion
reflects the thinking that has arisen since the attack on the World
Trade Center that standard liability policies are not meant to insure
against such catastrophic losses as can be caused by terrorist
militant groups.
m.    Damage to Property
“Property damage” to:
(1)    Property:
(a)    You own, rent, or occupy including any
costs or expenses incurred by you, or any
other person, organization, or entity, for
repair, replacement, enhancement,
restoration, or maintenance of such property
for any reason, including prevention of injury
to a person or damage to another’s
property; or
(b)    Owned or transported by the insured and
arising out of the ownership, maintenance or
use of a “covered auto”.(2)    Premises you sell, give away or abandon, if the
“property damage” arises out of any part of those
premises;
(3)    Property loaned to you;
(4)    Personal property in the care, custody or control
of the insured;
(5)    That particular part of real property on which you
or any contractors or subcontractors working
directly or indirectly on your behalf are performing
operations, if the “property damage” arises out of
those operations; or
(6)    That particular part of any property that must be
restored, repaired or replaced because “your
work” was incorrectly performed on it.
Paragraph (2) of this exclusion does not apply if
the premises are “your work” and were never
occupied, rented or held for rental by you.
Paragraphs (1)(b), (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this
exclusion do not apply to liability assumed under a
sidetrack agreement.
Paragraphs (3) and (4) of this exclusion do not
apply to liability assumed under a written Trailer
Interchange agreement.
Paragraph (6) of this exclusion does not apply to
“property damage” included in the “products-
completed operations hazard”.
n.    Damage to Your Product“Property damage” to “your product” arising out of it or
any part of it.
o.    Damage to Your Work
“Property damage” to “your work” arising out of it or
any part of it and included in the “products-completed
operations hazard”. This exclusion does not apply if the
damaged work or the work out of which the damage
arises was performed on your behalf by a
subcontractor.
p.    Damage to Impaired Property Or Property Not
Physically Injured
“Property damage” to “impaired property” or property
that has not been physically injured, arising out of:
(1)    A defect, deficiency, inadequacy or dangerous
condition in “your product” or “your work”; or
(2)    A delay or failure by you or anyone acting on your
behalf to perform a contract or agreement in
accordance with its terms.
This exclusion does not apply to the loss of use of
other property arising out of sudden and accidental
physical injury to “your product” or “your work” after it
has been put to its intended use.
q.    Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property
Damages claimed for any loss, cost or expense
incurred by you or others for the loss of use,withdrawal, recall, inspection, repair, replacement,
adjustment, removal or disposal of:
(1)    “Your product”;
(2)    “Your work”; or
(3)    “Impaired property”;
if such product, work, or property is withdrawn or
recalled from the market or from use by any person or
organization because of a known or suspected defect,
deficiency, inadequacy or dangerous condition in it.
The exclusions are basically the same as those found on the CGL
policy, with one addition. The umbrella policy excludes damage to
property the insured owns or transports and that arises out of the
ownership, maintenance, or use of a covered auto. This is in keeping
with the fact that CU 00 01 is a liability policy, and a liability policy is
not written to provide coverage for first party physical damage
claims.
r.    Personal and Advertising Injury
“Bodily injury” arising out of “personal and advertising
injury”.
s.    Professional Services
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” due to rendering
of or failure to render any professional service. This
includes but is not limited to:
(1)    Legal, accounting or advertising services;(2)    Preparing, approving, or failing to prepare or
approve maps, shop drawings, opinions, reports,
surveys, field orders, change orders or drawings
or specifications;
(3)    Inspection, supervision, quality control,
architectural or engineering activities done by or
for you on a project on which you serve as
construction manager;
(4)    Engineering services, including related
supervisory or inspection services;
(5)    Medical, surgical, dental, X-ray or nursing
services treatment, advice or instruction;
(6)    Any health or therapeutic service treatment,
advice or instruction;
(7)    Any service, treatment, advice or instruction for
the purpose of appearance or skin enhancement,
hair removal or replacement or personal grooming
or therapy;
(8)    Any service, treatment, advice or instruction
relating to physical fitness, including service,
treatment, advice or instruction in connection with
diet, cardio-vascular fitness, body building or
physical training programs;
(9)    Optometry or optical or hearing aid services
including the prescribing, preparation, fitting,
demonstration or distribution of ophthalmic lenses
and similar products or hearing aid devices;(10)  Body piercing services;
(11)  Services in the practice of pharmacy;
(12)  Law enforcement or firefighting services; and
(13)  Handling, embalming, disposal, burial, cremation
or disinterment of dead bodies.
This exclusion applies even if the claims against
any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing
in the supervision, hiring, employment, training or
monitoring of others by that insured, if the
“occurrence” which caused the “bodily injury” or
“property damage”, involved the rendering of or
failure to render any professional service.
t.    Electronic Data
Damages arising out of the loss of, loss of use of,
damage to, corruption of, inability to access or inability
to manipulate electronic data.
However, this exclusion does not apply to liability for
damages because of “bodily injury”.
As used in this exclusion, electronic data means
information, facts or programs stored as or on, created
or used on, or transmitted to or from computer
software, including systems and applications software,
hard or floppy disks, CD-ROMS, tapes, drives, cells,
data processing devices or any other media which are
used with electronically controlled equipment.
This exclusion does not apply if valid “underlying
insurance” for the electronic data risks describedabove exists or would have existed but for the
exhaustion of underlying limits for “bodily injury” and
“property damage”. The insurance provided under this
Coverage Part will follow the same provisions,
exclusions and limitations that are contained in the
applicable “underlying insurance”, unless otherwise
directed by this insurance.
u.    Recording and Distribution of Material or Information
In Violation of Law
“Bodily injury” or “property damage” arising directly or
indirectly out of any action or omission that violates or
is alleged to violate:
(1)    The Telephone Consumer Protection Act (TCPA),
including any amendment of or addition to such
law;
(2)    The CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, including any
amendment of or addition to such law;
(3)    The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), and any
amendment of or addition to such law, including
the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act
(FACTA); or
(4)    Any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or
regulation, other than the TCPA, CAN-SPAM Act
of 2003 or FCRA and their amendments and
additions, that addresses, prohibits, or limits the
printing, dissemination, disposal, collecting,
recording, sending, transmitting, communicating or
distribution of material or information.Bodily injury arising out of personal and advertising injury is
covered by coverage B under the terms of the umbrella policy, so
such injury is specifically excluded under coverage A. This is to
prevent double liability coverage under the one umbrella policy.
The umbrella policy has a professional services exclusion that is
not found on the CGL form (although the CGL form does usually
exclude professional services liability through the use of an
endorsement). Such an exposure is a specialized risk and should be
insured under a professional liability policy. In 2013, ISO added
language to address liability for negligent supervision claims caused
by rendering or failure to render professional services, which is a
reinforcement of coverage intent.
Another exclusion on the current umbrella coverage form pertains
to damages arising out of loss of, loss of use of, or damage to
electronic data. It is meant to strengthen the point that the umbrella
form does not cover damages revolving around electronic data—an
item that is not tangible property. Coverage A under the umbrella
policy applies to damage to and to loss of use of tangible property.
While some court decisions have blurred the distinction between
tangible property and intangible property (for example, computer
hardware and computer software respectively), the fact remains that
the umbrella policy was not meant to apply to damage to other than
tangible property. The definition of “property damage” has been
revised to note that electronic data is not tangible property for the
purposes of umbrella liability insurance; this exclusion will complement
that definition.
Note that in the 2013 revision of CU 00 01, ISO broadened
coverage under the electronic data exclusion by providing an
exception for liability for damages because of bodily injury. The
change was made due to requests to ISO that this exception be
added. ISO also incorporated the recording and distribution of
material or information in violation of law exclusion in the 2013revision. The exclusion was previously found on mandatory
endorsement CU 00 04, which was withdrawn from use.
Coverage B—Personal and Advertising Injury
Liability
1.    Insuring Agreement
a.    We will pay on behalf of the insured the “ultimate net
loss” in excess of the “retained limit” because of
“personal and advertising injury” to which this insurance
applies. We will have the right and duty to defend the
insured against any “suit” seeking damages for such
“personal and advertising injury” when the “underlying
insurance” does not provide coverage or the limits of
“underlying insurance” have been exhausted. When we
have no duty to defend, we will have the right to
defend, or to participate in the defense of, the insured
against any other “suit” seeking damages to which this
insurance may apply. However, we will have no duty to
defend the insured against any “suit” seeking damages
for “personal and advertising injury” to which this
insurance does not apply. At our discretion, we may
investigate any offense that may involve this insurance
and settle any resultant claim or “suit”, for which we
have the duty to defend. But:
(1)    The amount we will pay for the “ultimate net loss”
is limited as described in Section III—Limits Of
Insurance; and
(2)    Our right and duty to defend end when we have
used up the applicable limit of insurance in the
payment of judgments or settlements under
Coverages A or B.No other obligation or liability to pay sums or
perform acts or services is covered unless
explicitly provided for under Supplementary
Payments—C overages A and B.
b.    This insurance applies to “personal and advertising
injury” that is subject to an applicable “retained limit”. If
any other limit, such as a sublimit, is specified in the
“underlying insurance”, this insurance does not apply to
“personal and advertising injury” arising out of that
exposure unless that limit is specified in the
Declarations under the Schedule of “underlying
insurance”.
c.    This insurance applies to “personal and advertising
injury” caused by an offense arising out of your
business but only if the offense was committed in the
“coverage territory” during the policy period.
The coverage B insuring agreement has basically the same
promises as the coverage A agreement, except that it applies to
personal and advertising injury instead of bodily injury and property
damage. Of course, coverage B applies to offenses arising out of the
named insured’s business, as opposed to occurrences, but this is in
keeping with the fact that coverage B deals with intentional acts and
not accidents.
Note that, unlike the coverage A insuring agreement, the coverage
B insuring agreement does not have clauses pertaining to prior
knowledge (the so-called Montrose provisions). Presumably, these
provisions, which attempt to limit application of the continuous injury
concept, are not pertinent to personal and advertising injuries as
defined in the umbrella policy. Can something like false arrest,
wrongful eviction, libel or slander, or infringement of another’s
copyright or slogan be injuries that occur continuously over time?Since the Montrose provisions are still being tested in court, any need
for the provisions to be attached to the coverage B insuring
agreement cannot be definitively answered.
Coverage B Exclusions
2.    Exclusions
 This insurance does not apply to:
a.    “Personal and advertising injury”:
(1)    Knowing Violation of Rights of Another
Caused by or at the direction of the insured with
the knowledge that the act would violate the rights
of another and would inflict “personal and
advertising injury”;
(2)    Material Published With Knowledge of Falsity
Arising out of oral or written publication, in any
manner, of material, if done by or at the direction
of the insured with knowledge of its falsity;
(3)    Material Published Prior to Policy Period
Arising out of oral or written publication, in any
manner, of material whose first publication took
place before the beginning of the policy period;
(4)    Criminal Acts
Arising out of a criminal act committed by or at
the direction of the insured;
(5)    Contractual LiabilityFor which the insured has assumed liability in a
contract or agreement. This exclusion does not
apply to:
(a)    Liability for damages that the insured would
have in the absence of the contract or
agreement.
(b)    Liability for false arrest, detention or
imprisonment assumed in a contract or
agreement.
The exclusions are similar in wording and effect to those found in
the coverage B section of the commercial general liability policy, but
some observations can still be made.
Exclusions 1 and 2 seem to contradict the fact that coverage B
covers the insured against certain described offenses that result from
intentional acts. After all, knowingly violating the rights of another and
knowingly publishing false material certainly are intentional acts.
However, the aim of the exclusions is to eliminate coverage only in
situations when the insured commits a personal and advertising injury
knowing that the act will injure another. If the insured did not know
that the act would violate the rights of another or that the material
was false, the exclusions are not applicable.
Exclusions 3 and 4 are obvious in their intent. CU 00 01, like other
liability policies, is not meant to cover acts that happen before the
policy period begins or acts that are criminal.
Notice that the umbrella policy in exclusion (5), contractual liability,
explicitly exempts liability for false arrest, detention, or imprisonment
assumed in a contract or agreement.
(6)    Breach of ContractArising out of a breach of contract, except an
implied contract to use another’s advertising idea
in your “advertisement”;
(7)    Quality or Performance of Goods—F ailure to
Conform to Statements
Arising out of the failure of goods, products or
services to conform with any statement of quality
or performance made in your “advertisement”;
(8)    Wrong Description of Prices
Arising out of the wrong description of the price of
goods, products or services stated in your
“advertisement”;
(9)    Infringement of Copyright, Patent, Trademark or
Trade Secret
Arising out of the infringement of copyright,
patent, trademark, trade secret or other
intellectual property rights. Under this exclusion,
such other intellectual property rights do not
include the use of another’s advertising idea in
your “advertisement”. However, this exclusion
does not apply to infringement, in your
“advertisement”, of copyright, trade dress or
slogan.
(10)  Insureds in Media and Internet Type Businesses
Committed by an insured whose business is:
(a)    Advertising, broadcasting, publishing or
telecasting;(b)    Designing or determining content of web-
sites for others; or
(c)    An Internet search, access, content or
service provider.
However, this exclusion does not apply to
Paragraphs 14.a, b. and c. of “personal and
advertising injury” under the Definitions Section.
For the purposes of this exclusion, the placing of
frames, borders or links, or advertising, for you or
others anywhere on the Internet, is not by itself,
considered the business of advertising,
broadcasting, publishing or telecasting.
(11)  Electronic Chatrooms or Bulletin Boards
Arising out of an electronic chatroom or bulletin
board the insured hosts, owns, or over which the
insured exercises control.
(12)  Unauthorized Use of Another’s Name or Product
Arising out of the unauthorized use of another’s
name or product in your e-mail address, domain
name or metatag, or any other similar tactics to
mislead another’s potential customers.
(13)  Pollution
Arising out of the actual, alleged or threatened
discharge, dispersal, seepage, migration, release
or escape of “pollutants” at any time.
(14)  Employment-related Practices.
To:(a)    A person arising out of any:
i.      Refusal to employ that person;
ii.     Termination of that person’s
employment; or
iii.    Employment-related practices, policies,
acts or omissions, such as coercion,
demotion, evaluation, reassignment,
discipline, defamation, harassment,
humiliation or discrimination directed at
that person; or
(b)    The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister
of that person as a consequence of
“personal and advertising injury” to that
person at whom any of the employment-
related practices described in Paragraphs
(i), (ii), or (iii) above is directed.
This exclusion applies whether the injury-causing
event described in Paragraphs (i), (ii), or (iii)
above occurs before employment, during
employment, or after employment of that person.
This exclusion applies whether the insured may be
liable as an employer or in any other capacity, and
to any obligation to share damages with or repay
someone else who must pay damages because of
the injury.
(15)  Professional Services
Arising out of the rendering of or failure to render
any professional service. This includes but is not
limited to:(a)    Legal, accounting or advertising services;
(b)    Preparing, approving, or failing to prepare
or approve maps, shop drawings, opinions,
reports, surveys, field orders, change
orders or drawings or specifications;
(c)    Inspection, supervision, quality control,
architectural or engineering activities done
by or for you on a project on which you
serve as construction manager;
(d)    Engineering services, including related
supervisory or inspection services;
(e)    Medical, surgical, dental, x-ray or nursing
services treatment, advice or instruction;
(f)    Any health or therapeutic service treatment,
advice or instruction;
(g)    Any service, treatment, advice, or
instruction for the purpose of appearance or
skin enhancement, hair removal or
replacement or personal grooming or
therapy;
(h)    Any service, treatment, advice or instruction
relating to physical fitness, including service,
treatment, advice or instruction in connection
with diet, cardio-vascular fitness, body
building or physical training programs;
(i)    Optometry or optical or hearing aid services
including the prescribing, preparation, fitting,
demonstration or distribution of ophthalmiclenses and similar products or hearing aid
devices;
(j)    Body piercing services;
(k)    Services in the practice of pharmacy;
(l)    Law enforcement or firefighting services;
and
(m)    Handling, embalming, disposal, burial,
cremation or disinterment of dead bodies.
This exclusion applies even if the claims against
any insured allege negligence or other wrongdoing
in the supervision, hiring, employment, training or
monitoring of others by that insured, if the offense
which caused the “personal and advertising
injury”, involved the rendering of or failure to
render any professional service.
(16)  War
However caused, arising, directly or indirectly, out
of:
(a)    War, including undeclared or civil war;
(b)    Warlike action by a military force, including
action in hindering or defending against an
actual or expected attack, by any
government, sovereign or other authority
using military personnel or other agents; or
(c)    Insurrection, rebellion, revolution, usurped
power, or action taken by governmentalauthority in hindering or defending against
any of these.
(17)  Recording and Distribution of Material or
Information In Violation of Law
Arising directly or indirectly out of any action or
omission that violates or is alleged to violate:
(a)    The Telephone Consumer Protection Act
(TCPA), including any amendment of or
addition to such law;
(b)    The CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, including any
amendment of or addition to such law;
(c)    The Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), and
any amendment of or addition to such law,
including the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transactions Act (FACTA); or
(d)    Any federal, state or local statute,
ordinance or regulation, other than the
TCPA, CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 or FCRA
and their amendments and additions, that
addresses, prohibits, or limits the printing,
dissemination, disposal, collecting,
recording, sending, transmitting,
communicating or distribution of material or
information
b.    “Pollution cost or expense”.
Exclusions (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (12) are similar to
commercial general liability policy exclusions pertaining to coverage
B, personal and advertising injury liability. (Note that an impliedcontract, as worded in an exception to exclusion 6, is an agreement
that is legitimately inferred from the conduct of the parties or by the
law as a matter of reason and justice.) Exclusion 7 pertaining to the
quality or performance of goods is aimed at preventing the umbrella
insurer from having to pay claims made by consumers that are
disappointed with the quality or performance of the insured’s goods,
products, or services. As for exclusion 9, note that the exception to
the exclusion is important because it restores coverage for
infringement of copyright, trade dress, or slogan that occurs in the
named insured’s advertisement.
Exclusions (10), (11), and (12) are a reflection of the response to
the liability exposures created by the Internet and websites. Note the
exception in exclusion 10 for certain personal injuries; these are false
arrest, detention, or imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and the
wrongful eviction or invasion of the right of private occupancy of a
room or premises that a person occupies.
The pollution exclusion is present to prevent coverage B from
applying to a pollution spill that a claimant may allege is a wrongful
entry into or invasion of the right of private occupancy. Coverage B
also does not apply to pollution cost or expense, that is, cleanup
costs associated with any pollution spill or release. Note that there
are no exceptions to this exclusion.
Coverage B also has exclusions for employment-related practices
liability and the rendering of or failure to render professional services.
Employment-related practices in exclusion 14 refers to things like
refusal to employ, termination of employment, coercion, defamation,
harassment, and discrimination. In exclusion 15, the umbrella policy
contains a list of professional services; this list is not all-inclusive. The
exposures noted in exclusions 14 and 15 are meant to be covered by
other liability forms or specialty type policies.The war exclusion precludes any coverage under the personal and
advertising injury liability section of the umbrella form that does not
exist under the bodily injury and property damage liability section
pertaining to war or warlike actions. Someone could claim a personal
injury (for example, false arrest, slander, or libel) arising out of a
warlike action, such as a terrorist attack, and then the insured would
seek coverage under the umbrella form. This exclusion prevents
insurance coverage under the insured’s umbrella policy.
In the 2013 revision of the umbrella policy, the same change was
made to the recording and distribution of material or information in
violation of the law exclusion (17) as was made in the coverage A
exclusions in CU 00 01.
Supplementary Payments—Coverages A and B
1.    We will pay, with respect to any claim we investigate or settle,
or any “suit” against an insured we defend, when the duty to
defend exists:
a.    All expenses we incur.
b.    Up to $2,000 for cost of bail bonds (including bonds
for related traffic law violations) required because of an
“occurrence” we cover. We do not have to furnish
these bonds.
c.    The cost of bonds to release attachments, but only for
bond amounts within the applicable limit of insurance.
We do not have to furnish these bonds.
d.    All reasonable expenses incurred by the insured at our
request to assist us in the investigation or defense of
the claim or “suit”, including actual loss of earnings up
to $250 a day because of time off from work.e.    All court costs taxed against the insured in the “suit”.
However, these payments do not include attorneys’
fees or attorneys’ expenses taxed against the insured.
f.     Prejudgment interest awarded against the insured on
that part of the judgment we pay. If we make an offer
to pay the applicable limit of insurance, we will not pay
any prejudgment interest based on that period of time
after the offer.
g.    All interest on the full amount of any judgment that
accrues after entry of the judgment and before we
have paid, offered to pay, or deposited in court the
part of the judgment that is within the applicable limit of
insurance.
These payments will not reduce the limits of insurance.
This section is identical to the commercial general liability policy,
except that the umbrella policy allows up to $2,000 for the cost of bail
bonds as opposed to the $250 limit under the CGL form. And, the
umbrella policy will pay for the bail bonds required because of an
occurrence covered by the policy, while the CGL form pays for bail
bonds required because of accidents or traffic law violations arising
out of the use of any vehicle to which the bodily injury liability
coverage applies. So, in keeping with the scope of the umbrella
policy, it provides broader supplementary payments.
2.    When we have the right but not the duty to defend the insured
and elect to participate in the defense, we will pay our own
expenses but will not contribute to the expenses of the insured
or the “underlying insurer”.
3.    If we defend an insured against a “suit” and an indemnitee of
the insured is also named as a party to the “suit”, we willdefend that indemnitee if all of the following conditions are
met:
a.    The “suit” against the indemnitee seeks damages for
which the insured has assumed the liability of the
indemnitee in a contract or agreement that is an
“insured contract”;
b.    This insurance applies to such liability assumed by the
insured;
c.    The obligation to defend, or the cost of the defense of,
that indemnitee, has also been assumed by the insured
in the same “insured contract”;
d.    The allegations in the “suit” and the information we
know about the “occurrence” are such that no conflict
appears to exist between the interests of the insured
and the interests of the indemnitee;
e.    The indemnitee and the insured ask us to conduct and
control the defense of that indemnitee against such
“suit” and agree that we can assign the same counsel
to defend the insured and the indemnitee; and
f.     The indemnitee:
(1)    Agrees in writing to:
(a)    Cooperate with us in the investigation,
settlement or defense of the “suit”;
(b)    Immediately send us copies of any
demands, notices, summonses or legal
papers received in connection with the “suit”;(c)    Notify any other insurer whose coverage is
available to the indemnitee; and
(d)    Cooperate with us with respect to
coordinating other applicable insurance
available to the indemnitee; and
(2)    Provides us with written authorization to:
(a)    Obtain records and other information
related to the “suit”; and
(b)    Conduct and control the defense of the
indemnitee in such “suit”.
So long as the above conditions are met,
attorneys’ fees incurred by us in the defense of
that indemnitee, necessary litigation expenses
incurred by us and necessary litigation expenses
incurred by the indemnitee at our request will be
paid as Supplementary Payments.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 2.b.
(2) of Section I—Coverage A—Bodily Injury And
Property Damage Liability, such payments will not
be deemed to be damages for “bodily injury” and
“property damage” and will not reduce the limits
of insurance.
Our obligation to defend an insured’s indemnitee
and to pay for attorneys’ fees and necessary
litigation expenses as Supplementary Payments
ends when we have used up the applicable limit of
insurance in the payment of judgments, or
settlements, or the conditions set forth above, or
the terms of the agreement described in
Paragraph f. above, are no longer met.The umbrella states that where the insurer has the right to defend
but not the duty, it is only responsible for its own expenses if it
chooses to participate in the defense. The umbrella insurer will not
contribute to defense costs expended by either the insured or the
primary insurer, even if it benefits from that defense. This reinforces
the idea that the primary insurer is the main party responsible for
defending the insured against a lawsuit and thus, is usually the party
that pays defense costs.
While the umbrella policy will defend an indemnitee of the insured
if that person is named as a party in a lawsuit against the insured, all
the conditions listed in this part of the umbrella policy must be met
before that defense will take place. The umbrella policy, like the CGL
form, lists several explicit conditions that must be met, and these
should be known by the insured since the insured is the party that has
agreed (in an insured contract) to assume the liability of the
indemnitee, and thus, to bear the ultimate responsibility for the
indemnification and defense of the indemnitee.
Section II—Who Is an Insured
1.    Except for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance,
or use of “covered autos”:
a.    If you are designated in the Declarations as:
(1)    An individual, you and your spouse are insureds,
but only with respect to the conduct of a business
of which you are the sole owner.
(2)    A partnership or joint venture, you are an insured.
Your members, your partners, and their spouses
are also insureds, but only with respect to the
conduct of your business.(3)    A limited liability company, you are an insured.
Your members are also insureds, but only with
respect to the conduct of your business. Your
managers are insureds, but only with respect to
their duties as your managers.
(4)    An organization other than a partnership, joint
venture or limited liability company, you are an
insured. Your “executive officers” and directors
are insureds, but only with respect to their duties
as your officers or directors. Your stockholders
are also insureds, but only with respect to their
liability as stockholders.
(5)    A trust, you are insured. Your trustees are also
insureds, but only with respect to their duties as
trustees.
b.    Each of the following is also an insured:
(1)    Your “volunteer workers” only while performing
duties related to the conduct of your business,
your “employees”, other than either your
“executive officers” (if you are an organization
other than a partnership, joint venture or limited
liability company) or your managers (if you are a
limited liability company), but only for acts within
the scope of their employment by you or while
performing duties related to the conduct of your
business. However, none of these “employees” or
“volunteer workers” are insureds for:
(a)    “Bodily injury” or “personal and advertising
injury”:(i)    To you, to your partners or members (if
you are a partnership or joint venture),
to your members (if you are a limited
liability company), to a co-“employee” in
the course of his or her employment or
performing duties related to the conduct
of your business, or to your other
“volunteer workers” while performing
duties related to the conduct of your
business:
(ii)   To the spouse, child, parent, brother or
sister of that co-“employee” or
“volunteer worker” as a consequence of
Paragraph (a)(i) above; or
(iii)  For which there is any obligation to
share damages with or repay someone
else who must pay damages because
of the injury described in Paragraphs
(a)(i) or (ii) above.
(b)    “Property damage” to property:
(i)    Owned, occupied or used by;
(ii)   Rented to, in the care, custody or
control of, or over which physical
control is being exercised for any
purpose by:
you, any of your “employees”,
“volunteer workers”, any partner or
member (if you are a partnership or
joint venture), or any member (if you
are a limited liability company).(2)    Any person (other than your “employee” or
“volunteer worker”), or any organization while
acting as your real estate manager.
(3)    Any person or organization having proper
temporary custody of your property if you die, but
only:
(a)    With respect to liability arising out of the
maintenance or use of that property; and
(b)    Until your legal representative has been
appointed.
(4)    Your legal representative if you die, but only with
respect to duties as such. That representative will
have all your rights and duties under this
Coverage Part.
c.    Any organization you newly acquire or form, other than
a partnership, joint venture or limited liability company,
and over which you maintain ownership or majority
interest, will qualify as a Named Insured if there is no
other similar insurance available to that organization.
However:
(1)    Coverage under this provision is afforded only
until the 90th day after you acquire or form the
organization or the end of the policy period,
whichever is earlier;
(2)    Coverage A does not apply to “bodily injury” or
“property damage” that occurred before you
acquired or formed the organization; and(3)    Coverage B does not apply to “personal and
advertising injury” arising out of an offense
committed before you acquired or formed the
organization.
In the first sentence note that the umbrella policy excludes from
the who is an insured category, those entities that may have liability
arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of covered autos;
liability arising from covered autos is addressed in Paragraph 2 of this
section, as shown next.
The remainder of paragraph 1 in the who is an insured section of
CU 00 01 mirrors the wording in the commercial general liability
policy.
2.    Only with respect to liability arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of “covered autos”:
a.    You are an insured.
b.    Anyone else while using with your permission a
“covered auto” you own, hire, or borrow is also an
insured except:
(1)    The owner or anyone else from whom you hire or
borrow a “covered auto”. This exception does not
apply if the “covered auto” is a trailer or semi-
trailer connected to a “covered auto” you own.
(2)    Your “employee” if the “covered auto” is owned
by that “employee” or a member of his or her
household.
(3)    Someone using a “covered auto” while he or she
is working in a business of selling, servicing,repairing, parking or storing “autos” unless that
business is yours.
(4)    Anyone other than your “employees”, partners (if
you are a partnership), members (if you are a
limited liability company), or a lessee or borrower
or any of their “employees”, while moving property
to or from a “covered auto”.
(5)    A partner (if you are a partnership), or a member
(if you are a limited liability company) for a
“covered auto” owned by him or her or a member
of his or her household.
(6)    Employees” with respect to “bodily injury” to:
(a)    Any fellow “employee” of the insured arising
out of and in the course of the fellow
“employee’s” employment or while
performing duties related to the conduct of
your business; or
(b)    The spouse, child, parent, brother or sister
of that fellow “employee” as a consequence
of Paragraph (a) above.
c.    Anyone liable for the conduct of an insured described
above is also an insured, but only to the extent of that
liability.
3.    Any additional insured under any policy of “underlying
insurance” will automatically be an insured under this
insurance.
Subject to Section III—Limits Of Insurance, if coverage
provided to the additional insured is required by a contract oragreement, the most we will pay on behalf of the additional
insured is the amount of insurance:
a.    Required by the contract or agreement, less any
amounts payable by any “underlying insurance”; or
b.    Available under the applicable Limits of Insurance
shown in the Declarations; whichever is less.
Additional insured coverage provided by this insurance
will not be broader than coverage provided by the
“underlying insurance”.
No person or organization is an insured with respect to
the conduct of any current or past partnership, joint
venture or limited liability company that is not shown as
a Named Insured in the Declarations.
Paragraph 2 lists separate qualifications for who is an insured with
respect to the ownership, maintenance, or use of covered autos. It is
similar to the who is an insured provision of the Business Auto
Coverage form (BAP).
Owners of covered autos that the named insured hires or borrows
are not insureds. Employees who injure fellow employees in the
course of employment are also not considered insureds under the
umbrella policy. (In the 2013 revision, ISO added that employees who
cause bodily injury to the spouse, child, parent, brother, or sister of a
fellow employee are also excluded from being considered an
insured.) If an employee of the named insured is driving a company
car on business with a fellow employee as a passenger and has an
at-fault accident, the umbrella policy will not provide coverage for the
driving employee because he is not considered an insured should the
fellow employee file a lawsuit against the driver. The named insured
is still considered an insured for coverage purposes, but of course,the workers comp and employers’ liability exclusions would normally
prevent insurance under the umbrella policy from applying to a claim
by the injured employee against the named insured employer.
Since the “who is an insured” provisions closely follow underlying
general liability and auto policies provisions on the subject, it then
naturally follows that additional insureds under any policy of
underlying insurance are automatically considered insureds under CU
00 01. But, there are limitations to note.
For example, the additional insured coverage provided by the
umbrella policy is only as broad as the coverage provided by the
underlying insurance; in other words, the additional insured has no
insurance coverages that the insured under the underlying insurance
policies does not have. Also, if coverage provided to the additional
insured is required by a contract, the most the umbrella insurer will
pay on behalf of the additional insured is the amount required by the
contract, less any amount payable by underlying insurance. This
allows the umbrella insurer to have a definite contractually required
amount that it can set aside for payment on behalf of an additional
insured.
Section III—Limits of Insurance
1.    The Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations and the
rules below fix the most we will pay regardless of the number
of:
a.    Insureds;
b.    Claims made, “suits” brought, or number of vehicles
involved; or
c.    Persons or organizations making claims or bringing
“suits”.2.    The Aggregate Limit is the most we will pay for the sum of all
“ultimate net loss” under:
a.    Coverage A, except “ultimate net loss” because of
“bodily injury” or “property damage” arising out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of a “covered auto”;
and
b.    Coverage B.
3.    Subject to 2. above, the Each Occurrence Limit is the most
we will pay for the sum of all “ultimate net loss” under
Coverage A because of all “bodily injury” and “property
damage” arising out of one “occurrence”.
4.    Subject to 2. above, the Personal and Advertising Injury Limit
is the most we will pay under Coverage B for the sum of all
“ultimate net loss” because of all “personal and advertising
injury” sustained by any one person or organization.
5.    If there is “underlying insurance” with a policy period that is
non-concurrent with the policy period of this Commercial
Liability Umbrella Coverage Part, the “retained limit(s)” will only
be reduced or exhausted by payments for:
a.    “Bodily injury” or “property damage” which occurs
during the policy period of this Coverage Part; or
b.    “Personal and advertising injury” for offenses that are
committed during the policy period of this Coverage
Part.
However, if any “underlying insurance” is written on a
claims-made basis, the “retained limit(s)” will only be
reduced or exhausted by claims for that insurance thatare made during the policy period, or any Extended
Reporting Period, of this Coverage Part.
The Aggregate Limit, as described in Paragraph 2.
above, applies separately to each consecutive annual
period and to any remaining period and to any
remaining period of less than twelve months, starting
with the beginning of the policy period shown in the
Declarations, unless the policy period is extended after
issuance for an additional period of less than twelve
months. In that case, the additional period will be
deemed part of the last preceding period for purposes
of determining the Limits of Insurance.
This section of the umbrella policy establishes the most that the
insurer will pay for a claim or lawsuit against the insured. The limits
that are set on the declarations page will not be exceeded regardless
of the number of insureds, claims, or number of vehicles involved. The
limits of insurance section notes that the policy has an aggregate
limit, an each occurrence limit, and an any one person or organization
limit.
The aggregate limit is the sum of all ultimate net loss under
coverage A and B of the policy, except for auto claims; auto claims,
for some reason, are not counted against the aggregate limit of the
umbrella policy. Of course, bodily injury or property damage arising
out of the use or ownership of a covered auto is subject to the each
occurrence limit.
Coverage A has the each occurrence limit. As an example of
these limits, say the insured’s policy has a $2,000,000 aggregate
limit, a $1,000,000 each occurrence limit. If the insured is liable for
bodily injuries to another person arising out of one occurrence, and
the ultimate net loss reaches the $1,000,000 mark, the insured has
that amount available for the claim. Once that claim is paid, theinsured has $1,000,000 of the aggregate limit left for other claims
that may arise during the policy period. If the ultimate net loss from
that one occurrence is $1,500,000, the insured still has only the
$1,000,000 limit available for payment because of the each
occurrence limit.
Coverage B has the any one person or organization limit. For
example, if the insured has a total of $2,000,000 available as the
aggregate limit during the policy period, but only a $500,000 per
person limit on coverage B claims, the most the insurer will pay for
personal and advertising injury to any one person or organization is
$500,000. If more than one person suffers such injuries, each can
collect up to $500,000, but if the aggregate limit of $2,000,000 is
reached during the policy period, the insured has no more limits of
insurance available under the umbrella policy for payments to
claimants.
Section IV—Conditions
1.    Appeals
If the “underlying insurer” or insured elects not to appeal a
judgment in excess of the “retained limit”, we may do so at our
own expense. We will also pay for taxable court costs, pre-
and postjudgment interest and disbursements associated with
such appeal. In no event will this provision increase our liability
beyond the applicable Limits of Insurance described in Section
III—Limits Of Insurance.
2.    Bankruptcy
a.    Bankruptcy of Insured
Bankruptcy or insolvency of the insured or of the
insured’s estate will not relieve us of our obligationsunder this Coverage Part.
b.    Bankruptcy of Underlying Insurer
Bankruptcy or insolvency of the “underlying insurer” will
not relieve us of our obligations under this Coverage
Part.
However, this insurance will not replace the “underlying
insurance” in the event of bankruptcy or insolvency of
the “underlying insurer”. This insurance will apply as if
the “underlying insurance” were in full effect.
3.    Duties in the Event of Occurrence, Offense, Claim or Suit
a.    You must see to it that we are notified as soon as
practicable of an “occurrence” or an offense,
regardless of the amount, which may result in a claim.
To the extent possible, notice should include:
(1)    How, when and where the “occurrence” or
offense took place;
(2)    The names and addresses of any injured persons
and witnesses; and
(3)    The nature and location of any injury or damage
arising out of the “occurrence” or offense.
b.    If a claim is made or “suit” is brought against any
insured, you must:
(1)    Immediately record the specifics of the claim or
“suit” and the date received; and(2)    Notify us as soon as practicable.
You must see to it that we receive written notice
of the claim or “suit” as soon as practicable.
c.    You and any other involved insured must:
(1)    Immediately send us copies of any demands,
notices, summonses or legal papers received in
connection with the claim or “suit”;
(2)    Authorize us to obtain records and other
information;
(3)    Cooperate with us in the investigation or
settlement of the claim or defense against the
“suit”; and
(4)    Assist us, upon our request, in the enforcement of
any right against any person or organization which
may be liable to the insured because of injury or
damage to which this insurance may also apply.
d.    No insured will, except at that insured’s own cost,
voluntarily make a payment, assume any obligation, or
incur any expense, other than for first aid, without our
consent.
The umbrella coverage form basically offers the same conditions
as the CGL policy.
While CU 00 01 does not relieve the insurer of its duty in the event
the underlying insurer becomes insolvent or goes bankrupt, the
umbrella policy does not replace the underlying insurance. As an
example: damages to the claimant total $2,000,000; the underlyinglimits are $1,500,000 and the umbrella policy has a limit of insurance
of $2,000,000; the underlying insurer becomes insolvent; the umbrella
policy will only cover damages beyond the underlying limits, or
$500,000.
The umbrella policy affords the insurer the right to appeal
judgments, in excess of the limits of underlying insurance, even if the
underlying insurer or the insured chooses not to appeal. The umbrella
insurer agrees to pay for the expenses of such an appeal, along with
taxable costs, prejudgment and post judgment interest, and
disbursements.
4.    Legal Action against Us
No person or organization has a right under this Coverage
Part:
a.    To join us as a party or otherwise bring us into a “suit”
asking for damages from an insured; or
b.    To sue us on this Coverage Part unless all of its terms
have been fully complied with.
A person or organization may sue us to recover on an
agreed settlement or on a final judgment against an
insured; but we will not be liable for damages that are
not payable under the terms of this Coverage Part or
that are in excess of the applicable limit of insurance.
An agreed settlement means a settlement and release
of liability signed by us, the insured and the claimant or
the claimant’s legal representative.
5.    Other Insurancea.    This insurance is excess over, and shall not contribute
with any other insurance, whether primary, excess,
contingent or on any other basis. This condition will not
apply to insurance specifically written as excess over
this Coverage Part.
When this insurance is excess, we will have no duty
under Coverage A or B to defend the insured against
any “suit” if any other insurer has a duty to defend the
insured against that “suit”. If no other insurer defends,
we will undertake to do so, but we will be entitled to
the insured’s rights against all those other insurers.
b.    When this insurance is excess over other insurance,
we will pay only our share of the “ultimate net loss” that
exceeds the sum of:
(1)    The total amount that all such other insurance
would pay for the loss in the absence of the
insurance provided under this Coverage Part; and
(2)    The total of all deductibles and self-insured
amounts under all that other insurance.
6.    Premium Audit
a.    We will compute all premiums for this Coverage Part
in accordance with our rules and rates.
b.    Premium shown in this Coverage Part as advance
premium is a deposit premium only. At the close of
each audit period we will compute the earned premium
for that period and send notice to the first Named
Insured. The due date for audit and retrospective
premiums is the date shown as the due date on the bill.If the sum of the advance and audit premiums paid for
the policy period is greater than the earned premium,
we will return the excess to the first Named Insured.
c.    The first Named Insured must keep records of the
information we need for premium computation, and
send us copies at such times as we may request.
7.    Representations or Fraud
By accepting this policy, you agree:
a.    The statements in the Declarations are accurate and
complete;
b.    Those statements are based upon representations
you made to us;
c.    We have issued this policy in reliance upon your
representations; and
d.    This policy is void in any case of fraud by you as it
relates to this policy or any claim under this policy.
8.    Separation of Insureds
Except with respect to the Limits of Insurance, and any rights
or duties specifically assigned in this Coverage Part to the
Named Insured, this insurance applies:
a.    As if each Named Insured were the only Named
Insured; and
b.    Separately to each insured against whom claim is
made or “suit” is brought.9.    Transfer of Rights of Recovery against Others to Us
If the insured has rights to recover all or part of any payment
we have made under this Coverage Part, those rights are
transferred to us. The insured must do nothing after loss to
impair them. At our request, the insured will bring “suit” or
transfer those rights to us and help us enforce them.
10.  When We Do Not Renew
If we decide not to renew this Coverage Part, we will mail or
deliver to the first Named Insured shown in the Declarations
written notice of the nonrenewal not less than 30 days before
the expiration date.
If notice is mailed, proof of mailing will be sufficient proof of
notice.
Again, most of the conditions listed here are standard general
liability provisions. The umbrella policy does add a disclaimer that
specifically voids the policy for fraud by the named insured relating to
the policy or claims under the policy. Of course, if the insurer wants
to void a policy due to fraud on the part of the insured, the insurer has
the responsibility to prove that fraud has been committed by the
insured; a mere allegation of fraud will not be sufficient to void the
policy coverages.
11.  Loss Payable
Liability under this Coverage Part does not apply to a given
claim unless and until:
a.    The insured or insured’s “underlying insurer” has
become obligated to pay the “retained limit”; andb.    The obligation of the insured to pay the “ultimate net
loss” in excess of the “retained limit” has been
determined by a final settlement or judgment or written
agreement among the insured, claimant and us.
12.  Transfer of Defense
When the underlying limits of insurance have been used up in
the payment of judgments or settlements, the duty to defend
will be transferred to us. We will cooperate in the transfer of
control to us of any outstanding claims or “suits” seeking
damages to which this insurance applies which would have
been covered by the “underlying insurance” had the applicable
limit not been used up.
13.  Maintenance of Underlying Insurance
Any “underlying insurance” must be maintained in full effect
without reduction of coverage or limits except for the reduction
of the aggregate limit in accordance with the provisions of such
“underlying insurance” that results from payment of claims,
settlement, or judgments to which this insurance applies.
Such exhaustion or reduction is not a failure to maintain
“underlying insurance”. Failure to maintain “underlying
insurance” will not invalidate insurance provided under this
Coverage Part, but insurance provided under this Coverage
Part will apply as if the “underlying insurance” were in full
effect.
If there is an increase in the scope of coverage of any
“underlying insurance” during the term of this policy, our liability
will be no more than it would have been if there had been no
such increase.You must notify us in writing as soon as practicable if any
“underlying insurance” is cancelled, not renewed, replaced or
otherwise terminated, or if the limits or scope of coverage of
any “underlying insurance” is changed.
14.  Expanded Coverage Territory
a.    If a “suit” is brought in a part of the “coverage
territory” that is outside of the United States of
America (including its territories and possessions),
Puerto Rico or Canada, and we are prevented by law,
or otherwise, from defending the insured, the insured
will initiate a defense of the “suit”. We will reimburse
the insured, under Supplementary Payments, for any
reasonable and necessary expenses incurred for the
defense of a “suit” seeking damages to which this
insurance applies, that we would have paid had we
been able to exercise our right and duty to defend. If
the insured becomes legally obligated to pay sums
because of damages to which this insurance applies in
a part of the “coverage territory” that is outside of the
United States of America (including its territories and
possessions), Puerto Rico or Canada, and we are
prevented by law, or otherwise, from paying such sums
on the insured’s behalf, we will reimburse the insured
for such sums.
b.    All payments or reimbursements we make for
damages because of judgments or settlements will be
made in U.S. currency at the prevailing exchange rate
at the time the insured became legally obligated to pay
such sums. All payments or reimbursements we make
for expenses under Supplementary Payments will be
made in U.S. currency at the prevailing exchange rate
at the time the expenses were incurred.c.    Any disputes between you and us as to whether there
is coverage under this policy must be filed in the courts
of the United States of America (including its territories
and possessions), Canada or Puerto Rico.
d.    The insured must fully maintain any coverage required
by law, regulation or other governmental authority
during the policy period, except for reduction of the
aggregate limits due to payments of claims, judgments
or settlements.
Failure to maintain such coverage required by law,
regulation or other governmental authority will not
invalidate this insurance. However, this insurance will
apply as if the required coverage by law, regulation or
other governmental authority was in full effect.
This set of conditions helps describe the nature of the umbrella
policy.
One of the provisions declares that liability under the umbrella
policy will not apply unless and until the insured or the underlying
insurer become obligated to pay the available limits of the scheduled
underlying insurance. In other words, if the limits of insurance on the
underlying policy or the self-insured retention of the insured are not
breached, the umbrella policy will not come into play.
Another provision states that when the underlying limits of
insurance have been used up in the payment of judgments or
settlements, the umbrella insurer will take over the duty to defend the
insured. The underlying insurance policy has a declaration that its
duty to defend ends when the applicable limit of insurance is used up,
so this particular provision tells the insured that his defense is still
being handled by an insurer.Another provision requires the maintenance of underlying
insurance. Failure to maintain underlying insurance will not invalidate
the umbrella policy coverage, but the umbrella insurer will apply the
insurance of the umbrella policy as if the underlying insurance were in
full effect. As an example: the underlying insurance has policy limits of
$1,000,000, and the umbrella policy applies to the ultimate net loss in
excess of this amount; the insured cancels the underlying insurance
policy in the middle of the policy period; if a loss then occurs, the
umbrella policy will not pay the claim unless the amount of the claim is
more than the $1,000,000 limit of the underlying policy.
Since the umbrella policy has an expansive coverage territory by
definition, the last of the policy’s conditions recognizes this expansion
by describing what will happen if a lawsuit against the insured is
brought in an area outside the United States, Puerto Rico, or Canada.
Should that happen, the umbrella insurer declares that, if it is
prevented by law or otherwise from defending the insured, the
insured should defend itself and the insurer will then reimburse the
insured. The insurer will pay any reasonable and necessary expenses
incurred by the insured for the defense against the lawsuit. And,
should the insured lose the lawsuit and become obligated to pay the
plaintiff, this last condition on the umbrella policy acts to reassure the
insured. The umbrella insurer promises that if it is prevented by law or
otherwise from paying the amount due, the insured should pay it and
the insurer will reimburse the insured for the amount paid.
This final condition on CU 00 01 says that all payments or
reimbursements made for such damages as described in the previous
paragraph will be made in U.S. currency at the prevailing exchange
rate at the time the insured became legally obligated to pay. And, any
disputes between the insured and the named insured as to whether
there is coverage under the umbrella form have to be settled in a
court of the U.S., Canada, or Puerto Rico; the insured is not free to
pick just any jurisdiction around the world in which to file a coverage
dispute lawsuit.Section V—Definitions
1.    “Advertisement” means a notice that is broadcast or published
to the general public or specific market segments about your
goods, products or services for the purpose of attracting
customers or supporters. For the purposes of this definition:
a.    Notices that are published include material placed on
the Internet or on similar electronic means of
communication; and
b.    Regarding web sites, only that part of a website that
is about your goods, products or services for the
purpose of attracting customers or supporters is
considered an advertisement.
2.    “Auto” means:
a.    A land motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer designed
for travel on public roads, including any attached
machinery or equipment; or
b.    Any other land vehicle that is subject to a compulsory
or financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle
insurance law where it is licensed or principally
garaged.
However, “auto” does not include “mobile equipment”.
3.    “Bodily injury” means bodily injury, disability, sickness or
disease sustained by a person, including death resulting from
any of these at any time. “Bodily injury” includes mental
anguish or other mental injury resulting from “bodily injury”.4.    “Coverage territory” means anywhere in the world with the
exception of any country or jurisdiction which is subject to
trade or other economic sanctions or embargo by the United
States of America.
5.    “Covered auto” means only those “autos” to which “underlying
insurance” applies.
6.    “Employee” includes a “leased worker”. “Employee” does not
include a “temporary worker”.
7.    “Executive officer” means a person holding any of the officer
positions created by your charter, constitution, by-laws or any
other similar governing document.
8.    “Impaired property” means tangible property, other than “your
product” or “your work”, that cannot be used or is less useful
because:
a.    It incorporates “your product” or “your work” that is
known or thought to be defective, deficient, inadequate
or dangerous; or
b.    You have failed to fulfill the terms of a contract or
agreement;
if such property can be restored to use by the repair,
replacement, adjustment or removal of “your product”
or “your work”, or your fulfilling the terms of the
contract or agreement.
Definitions 1, 2, 6, 7, and 8 are taken from the definitions section
of the CGL policy. Note that the auto definition in CU 00 01, as in CG
00 01, attempts to draw a clear line between an auto and mobile
equipment for purposes of liability coverage placement.CU 00 01 does expand the bodily injury definition to include mental
anguish or other mental injury resulting from bodily injury. This is not
to say that the umbrella policy would apply to mental injury resulting
from mental stress. An actual bodily injury is required before any
mental stress or anguish claims are accepted as covered by the
umbrella policy.
Coverage territory encompasses a broader reach in the umbrella
than in the CGL policy. In the umbrella policy, the coverage territory is
mostly worldwide and applies to operations of the insured, products
and completed operations of the insured, and other liability
exposures. And, the coverage territory (in connection with the
expanded coverage territory condition in CU 00 01) for the umbrella
policy does not require a lawsuit against the insured to be brought in
the U.S., Puerto Rico, or Canada. The suit can be brought just about
anywhere in the world and the umbrella insurer will honor its duty to
defend.
9.    “Insured contract” means:
a.    A contract for a lease of premises. However, that
portion of the contract for a lease of premises that
indemnifies any person or organization for damage by
fire to premises while rented to you or temporarily
occupied by you with permission of the owner is not an
“insured contract”;
b.    A sidetrack agreement;
c.    Any easement or license agreement, except in
connection with construction or demolition operations
on or within 50 feet of a railroad;
d.    An obligation, as required by ordinance, to indemnify a
municipality, except in connection with work for amunicipality;
e.    An elevator maintenance agreement;
f.     That part of any contract or agreement entered into,
as part of your business, pertaining to the rental or
lease, by you or any of your “employees”, of any
“auto”. However, such contract or agreement shall not
be considered an “insured contract” to the extent that it
obligates you or any of your “employees” to pay for
“property damage” to any “auto” rented or leased by
you or any of your “employees”.
g.    That part of any other contract or agreement
pertaining to your business (including an indemnification
of a municipality in connection with work performed for
a municipality) under which you assume the tort liability
of another party to pay for “bodily injury” or “property
damage” to a third person or organization. Tort liability
means a liability that would be imposed by law in the
absence of any contract or agreement.
Paragraphs f. and g. do not include that part of any
contract or agreement:
(1)    That indemnifies a railroad for “bodily injury” or
“property damage” arising out of construction or
demolition operations, within 50 feet of any
railroad property and affecting any railroad bridge
or trestle, tracks, roadbeds, tunnel, underpass or
crossing;
(2)    That pertains to the loan, lease or rental of an
“auto” to you or any of your “employees”, if the“auto” is loaned, leased or rented with a driver;
and
(3)    That holds a person or organization engaged in
the business of transporting property by “auto” for
hire harmless for your use of a “covered auto”
over a route or territory that person or
organization is authorized to serve by public
authority.
The umbrella policy differs from the CGL policy definition of
“insured contract” by adding provisions for auto rental or lease
contracts. This is merely a reproduction of the definition of insured
contract that appears in the business auto coverage form and
reinforces the fact that the umbrella policy does apply to auto liability
exposures. And note that—pertaining to an auto rental or lease
contract—the definition of an insured contract also states that the
auto contract is not considered an insured contract to the extent that
it obligates the named insured or any employee to pay for property
damage to any auto rented or leased by the named insured or any
employee. This is in keeping with the fact that CU 00 01 does not
extend coverage to any loss, cost, or expense payable under or
resulting from any auto first-party physical damage coverage, and the
fact that property damage to personal property in the care, custody,
or control of the insured is excluded.
10.  “Leased worker” means a person leased to you by a labor
leasing firm under an agreement between you and the labor
leasing firm, to perform duties related to the conduct of your
business. “Leased worker” does not include a “temporary
worker”.
11.  “Loading or unloading” means the handling of property:a.    After it is moved from the place where it is accepted
for movement into or onto an aircraft or watercraft or
“auto”;
b.    While it is in or on an aircraft or watercraft or “auto”;
or
c.    While it is being moved from an aircraft or watercraft
or “auto” to the place where it is finally delivered;
but “loading or unloading” does not include the
movement of property by means of a mechanical
device, other than a hand truck, that is not attached to
the aircraft or watercraft or “auto”.
12.  “Mobile equipment” means any of the following types of land
vehicles, including any attached machinery or equipment:
a.    Bulldozers, farm machinery, forklifts and other vehicles
designed for use principally off public roads;
b.    Vehicles maintained for use solely on or next to
premises you own or rent;
c.    Vehicles that travel on crawler treads;
d.    Vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, maintained
primarily to provide mobility to permanently mounted:
(1)    Power cranes, shovels, loaders, diggers or drills;
or
(2)    Road construction or resurfacing equipment such
as graders, scrapers or rollers;e.    Vehicles not described in a., b., c. or d. above that are
not self-propelled and are maintained primarily to
provide mobility to permanently attached equipment of
the following types:
(1)    Air compressors, pumps and generators,
including spraying, welding, building cleaning,
geophysical exploration, lighting and well servicing
equipment; or
(2)    Cherry pickers and similar devices used to raise
or lower workers;
f.     Vehicles not described in a., b., c. or d. above
maintained primarily for purposes other than the
transportation of persons or cargo. However, self-
propelled vehicles with the following types of
permanently attached equipment are not “mobile
equipment” but will be considered “autos”:
(1)    Equipment designed primarily for:
(a)    Snow removal;
(b)    Road maintenance, but not construction or
resurfacing; or
(c)    Street cleaning;
(2)    Cherry pickers and similar devices mounted on
automobile or truck chassis and used to raise or
lower workers; and
(3)    Air compressors, pumps and generators,
including spraying, welding, building cleaning,geophysical exploration, lighting and well servicing
equipment.
However, “mobile equipment” does not include
land vehicles that are subject to a compulsory or
financial responsibility law or other motor vehicle
insurance law where it is licensed or principally
garaged. Land vehicles subject to a compulsory
or financial responsibility law or other motor
vehicle insurance law are considered “autos”.
“Occurrence” means an accident, including
continuous or repeated exposure to substantially
the same general harmful conditions.
Definitions 10, 11, 12, and 13 mirror the definitions in the CGL
policy. The definition of “mobile equipment” complements the
definition of “auto” pertaining to land vehicles that are subject to
financial responsibility laws or other motor vehicle insurance laws;
such vehicles are considered autos and claims involving such vehicles
are handled as auto claims, not general liability claims.
14.  “Personal and advertising injury” means injury, including
consequential “bodily injury”, arising out of one or more of the
following offenses:
a.    False arrest, detention or imprisonment;
b.    Malicious prosecution;
c.    The wrongful eviction from, wrongful entry into, or
invasion of the right of private occupancy of a room,
dwelling or premises that a person occupies,
committed by or on behalf of its owner, landlord or
lessor;d.    Oral or written publication of material that slanders or
libels a person or organization or disparages a
person’s or organization’s goods, products or services;
e.    Oral or written publication, in any manner, of material
that violates a person’s right to privacy;
f.     The use of another’s advertising idea in your
“advertisement”; or
g.    Infringing upon another’s copyright, trade dress or
slogan in your “advertisement”.
15.  “Pollutants” mean any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant
or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acid,
alkalis, chemicals and waste. Waste includes materials to be
recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.
16.  “Pollution cost or expense” means any loss, cost or expense
arising out of any:
a.    Request, demand, order or statutory or regulatory
requirement that any insured or others test for, monitor,
clean up, remove, contain, treat, detoxify or neutralize,
or in any way respond to, or assess the effects of
“pollutants”; or
b.    Claim or suit by or on behalf of a governmental
authority for damages because of testing for,
monitoring, cleaning up, removing, containing, treating,
detoxifying or neutralizing, or in any way responding to,
or assessing the effects of, “pollutants”.
17.  “Products-completed operations hazard”:a.    Includes all “bodily injury” and “property damage”
occurring away from premises you own or rent and
arising out of “your product” or “your work” except:
(1)    Products that are still in your physical
possession; or
(2)    Work that has not yet been completed or
abandoned. However, “your work” will be deemed
completed at the earliest of the following times:
(a)    When all of the work called for in your
contract has been completed.
(b)    When all of the work to be done at the job
site has been completed if your contract
calls for work at more than one job site.
(c)    When that part of the work done at a job
site has been put to its intended use by any
person or organization other than another
contractor or subcontractor working on the
same project.
Work that may need service, maintenance,
correction, repair or replacement, but which
is otherwise complete, will be treated as
completed.
b.    Does not include “bodily injury” or “property damage”
arising out of:
(1)    The transportation of property, unless the injury
or damage arises out of a condition in or on a
vehicle not owned or operated by you, and thatcondition was created by the “loading or
unloading” of that vehicle by any insured; or
(2)    The existence of tools, uninstalled equipment or
abandoned or unused materials
This set of definitions mirrors those on the CGL form and the BAP.
CU 00 01 contains the definition of pollution cost or expense just like
the BAP.
18.  “Property damage” means:
a.    Physical injury to tangible property, including all
resulting loss of use of that property. All such loss of
use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the
physical injury that caused it; or
b.    Loss of use of tangible property that is not physically
injured. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur
at the time of the “occurrence” that caused it.
With respect to the ownership, maintenance, or use of
“covered autos”, property damage also includes “pollution cost
and expense”, but only to the extent that coverage exists under
the “underlying insurance” or would have existed but for the
exhaustion of the underlying limits.
For the purposes of this insurance, with respect to other than
the ownership, maintenance, or use of “covered autos”,
electronic data is not tangible property. As used in this
definition, electronic data means information, facts or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted
to or from computer software(including systems and
applications software), hard or floppy disks, CD-ROMs, tapes,drives, cells, data processing devices or any other media
which are used with electronically controlled equipment.
19.  “Retained limit” means the available limits of “underlying
insurance” scheduled in the declarations or the “self-insured
retention”, whichever applies.
20.  “Self-insured retention” means the dollar amount listed in the
declarations that will be paid by the insured before this
insurance becomes applicable only with respect to
“occurrences” or offenses not covered by the “underlying
insurance”. The “self-insurance retention” does not apply to
“occurrences” or offenses which would have been covered by
“underlying insurance” but for the exhaustion of applicable
limits.
21.  “Suit” means a civil proceeding in which damages because of
“bodily injury”, “property damage” or “personal and advertising
injury” to which this insurance applies are alleged. “Suit”
includes:
a.    An arbitration proceeding in which such damages are
claimed and to which the insured must submit or does
submit with our consent; or
b.    Any other alternative dispute resolution proceeding in
which such damages are claimed and to which the
insured submits with our consent or the “underlying
insurer’s” consent.
22.  “Temporary worker” means a person who is furnished to you
to substitute for a permanent “employee” on leave or to meet
seasonal or short-term workload conditions.Definition 18 expands the general liability definition of “property
damage” to include pollution cost or expense for covered autos,
provided that the same coverage exists in the underlying insurance.
This enables the umbrella policy to back up an underlying auto
insurance policy since a standard business auto policy does cover, to
a degree, pollution cost or expense. The coverage A insuring
agreement of CU 00 01 refers to bodily injury and property damage,
and if pollution cost or expense were not included in the definition of
property damage, the coverage that does exist for this particular
exposure under an underlying auto insurance policy would not extend
into the umbrella scope of coverage.
The definition of “property damage” also makes the point that
electronic data is not tangible property so that there can be no
inference that damage to things like computer disks or other
electronic data is to be covered under the terms of this policy.
“Retained limits” and “self-insured retentions” are defined here
because the umbrella policy comes into play when these limits are
exceeded in a claim against the insured. The retained limits are the
limits of insurance for the respective underlying insurance policies and
are scheduled on the declarations page of the umbrella policy. The
self-insured retention is the amount that the insured will pay up front
for a claim before the umbrella policy applies. This self-insured
retention becomes applicable only with respect to occurrences or
offenses that are not covered by the underlying insurance. This is
logical because if the underlying insurance policies offer coverage for
a liability exposure facing the insured, having a self-insured retention
also apply to the exposure would give the umbrella insurer a double
layer of protection.
23.  “Ultimate net loss” means the total sum, after reduction for
recoveries or salvages collectible, that the insured becomes
legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of settlement
or judgments or any arbitration or other alternate disputemethod entered into with our consent or the “underlying
insurer’s” consent.
24.  “Underlying insurance” means any policies of insurance listed
in the declarations under the schedule of “underlying
insurance”.
25.  “Underlying insurer” means any insurer who provides any
policy of insurance listed in the schedule of “underlying
insurance”.
26.  “Volunteer worker” means a person who is not your
“employee”, and who donates his or her work and acts at the
direction of and within the scope of duties determined by you,
and is not paid a fee, salary or other compensation by you or
anyone else for their work performed for you.
27.  “Your product”:
a.    Means:
(1)    Any goods or products, other than real property,
manufactured, sold, handled, distributed or
disposed of by:
(a)    You;
(b)    Others trading under your name; or
(c)    A person or organization whose business or
assets you have acquired; and
(2)    Containers (other than vehicles), materials, parts
or equipment furnished in connection with such
goods or products.b.    Includes:
(1)    Warranties or representations made at any time
with respect to the fitness, quality, durability,
performance or use of “your product”; and
(2)    The providing of or failure to provide warnings or
instructions.
c.    Does not include vending machines or other property
rented to or located for the use of others but not sold.
28.  “Your work”:
a.    Means:
(1)    Work or operations performed by you or on your
behalf; and
(2)    Materials, parts or equipment furnished in
connection with such work or operations.
b.    Includes:
(1)    Warranties or representations made at any time
with respect to the fitness, quality, durability,
performance or use of “your work”, and
(2)    The providing of or failure to provide warnings or
instructions.
Definitions 24 and 25 simply reflect the nature of the umbrella
coverage. The umbrella policy comes into play when the underlying
insurance is used up: That is the rationale behind umbrella policies. It
then makes sense to define exactly what “underlying insurance” and“underlying insurers” are so that all parties to the umbrella insurance
contract understand the lines of coverage that exist for the insured.
“Ultimate net loss”, definition 23, is an important term to define
since the insuring agreements of CU 00 01 pertain to paying such a
loss on behalf of the insured. The ultimate net loss amount tells the
insured and the insurers exactly how much the claim against the
insured costs.
The other definitions listed here mirror those found on the
standard underlying CGL coverage form.
Endorsements
There are several endorsements that can be used to modify the
coverage provided by CU 00 01. The following information is a brief
discussion of some of these endorsements.
CU 04 03 12 07, Employee Benefits Liability Coverage, is a claims-
made endorsement. Under the provisions of CU 04 03, the insurer
agrees to pay on behalf of the insured the ultimate net loss in excess
of the retained limit because of any negligent act, error, or omission
of the insured committed in the administration of the employee benefit
program.
“Administration” means providing information to employees with
respect to eligibility for or scope of employee benefit programs. It
also includes handling records in connection with the program, and
effecting, continuing, or terminating the participation of any employee
in the program.
An employee benefit program provides some or all of the following
benefits to employees: group life insurance; group accident or health
insurance; dental, vision, and hearing plans; flexible spendingaccounts; profit sharing plans; employee savings plans; pension
plans; unemployment insurance; social security benefits; workers
compensation benefits; vacation plans; leave of absence programs;
and any other similar benefits designated in the schedule.
The endorsement does not apply to: dishonest, fraudulent, or
criminal acts; bodily injury; property damage; personal and
advertising liability; failure to perform a contract; insufficiency of
funds; ERISA; taxes or fines; employment-related practices;
inadequacy of performance of investments or of advice to any person
with respect to participation in the employee benefit program; or
failure of the insured to comply with any mandatory workers
compensation, unemployment compensation insurance, social
security, or disability benefits laws or any similar law.
CU 04 12 04 13, Condominiums, Co-Ops, Associations—
Directors and Officers Liability Coverage Endorsement, was
introduced with the 2013 revision of the umbrella policy. Three
coverages are available under the endorsement: management liability,
association reimbursement, and association liability. Coverage is
provided on a claims-made basis. When attached to the CU 00 01,
this endorsement provides a broadening of coverage.
CU 21 00 09 00, Exclusion—All Hazards in Connection with
Designated Premises, is an exclusionary endorsement pertaining to
liability arising out of any specific premises. This endorsement
excludes coverage for all hazards in connection with a designated
premises.
CU 21 02 09 00, Exclusion—Products-Completed Operations
Hazard, excludes coverage for liability arising out of the
products/completed operations hazard.CU 21 03 09 00, Exclusion—Designated Work, excludes bodily
injury or property damage included in the products-completed
operations hazard and arising out of the work of the named insured.
The description of the work is listed in the schedule of the
endorsement.
CU 21 07 12 05, Contractual Liability Limitation, is an optional
endorsement pertaining to contractual liability. This endorsement
replaces the definition of “insured contract” that is on CU 00 01.
Paragraph g. of the definition is dropped; this pertains to a contract
by which the insured assumes the tort liability of another.
CU 21 09 09 00, Exclusion—Explosion, Collapse and Underground
Property Damage Hazard (Specified Operations), applies to liability
coverage for property damage included within the explosion, the
collapse, or the underground property damage hazards, and limits the
coverage to specified operations.
CU 21 11 09 00, Limitation of Coverage to Designated Premises
or Project, states that the insurance applies only to bodily injury,
property damage, or personal and advertising injury arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or use of the premises shown in the
schedule and operations necessary or incidental to those premises.
CU 21 12 09 00, Abuse or Molestation Exclusion, excludes
coverage for liability for abuse or molestation of a person in the care,
custody, or control of an insured.
CU 21 15 04 13, Exclusion—Financial Services, is an exclusion for
bodily injury, property damage, or personal and advertising injury
resulting from the rendering of or the failure to render financial
services by any insured to others. The endorsement could be used to
modify exposures presented by accountants, banks, securities, andbrokers in conjunction with CU 22 04 when fiduciary coverage is being
excluded.
CU 21 16 09 00, Exclusion—Designated Ongoing Operations,
excludes bodily injury or property damage arising out of the ongoing
operations described in the schedule of the endorsement.
CU 21 25 12 01, Total Pollution Exclusion Endorsement, totally
eliminates coverage for pollution liability that is not already precluded
by the exclusionary language of the umbrella policy.
CU 21 27 12 04, Fungi or Bacteria Exclusion, excludes bodily
injury or property damage that would not have occurred but for the
inhalation of, ingestion of, contact with, or the presence of any fungi
or bacteria on or within a building or structure.
CU 21 42 12 04, Exclusion—Exterior Insulation and Finish
Systems, excludes coverage for injuries or damages arising out of or
caused by exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS).
CU 21 43 12 04, Exclusion—Designated Products, excludes
coverage for injury or damage included in the products-completed
operations hazard and arising out of any of the named insured’s
products shown in the schedule.
CU 21 50 03 05, Silica or Silica-Related Dust Exclusion, excludes
coverage for injury or damage arising out of the inhalation of,
ingestion of, exposure to, or presence of silica or silica-related dust.
CU 21 51 12 05, Total Pollution Exclusion with a Hostile Fire
Exception, is an optional endorsement that totally excludes bodily
injury or property damage that would not have occurred in whole or in
part but for the release or discharge of pollutants at any time; in other
words, a total pollution exclusion. This endorsement does allow oneexception however; the pollution exclusion does not apply to bodily
injury or property damage arising out of the heat, smoke, or fumes
from a hostile fire under most circumstances.
CU 21 52 12 05, Total Pollution Exclusion with a Building Heating,
Cooling and Dehumidifying Equipment Exception and a Hostile Fire
Exception, is a similar endorsement except that it adds another
exception to the absolute pollution exclusion. This endorsement adds
an exception for bodily injury caused by smoke, fumes, vapor, or soot
produced by or originating from building heating, cooling, and
dehumidifying equipment.
CU 21 58 05 09, Communicable Disease Exclusion, is the
communicable disease exclusion.
CU 21 70 12 07, Abuse or Molestation Exclusion—Specified
Professional Services, prevents coverage for abuse or molestation by
anyone of any person while in the care, custody, or control of any
insured.
CU 22 03 09 00, Exclusion—Riot, Civil Commotion or Mob Action
—Governmental Subdivisions, eliminates coverage for liability arising
out of riot, civil commotion, or mob action, or any act or omission in
connection with the prevention of or suppression of mob action, riot,
or civil commotion.
CU 22 06 09 00, Exclusion—Existence or Maintenance of Streets,
Roads, Highways or Bridges, eliminates coverage for liability of a
government entity arising out of its ownership of, control of, or
maintenance of streets, roads, highways, or bridges.
CU 22 32 09 00, Agricultural Produce Trailers—S easonal, is the
agricultural produce trailers seasonal endorsement which providescoverage for farm trailers and semitrailers with a load capacity
exceeding 2,000 pounds. This is not used when the load is livestock.
CU 22 35 09 00, Truckers—Insurance for Non-Trucking Use, can
be used when autos are neither rented nor used for business
purposes or to haul someone else’s trailers, in other words,
nontrucking activities (bobtailing or deadheading).
CU 22 36 12 05, Truckers—U niform Intermodal Interchange
Endorsement Form UIIE—1, was revised in order to correspond with
the amendments to the Uniform Intermodal Interchange and Facilities
Access Agreement. A new paragraph has been added to the
endorsement with respect to the motor carrier indemnifying
indemnitees without regard to whether their liability is vicarious,
implied by law, or as the result of the fault or negligence of the
indemnitees. And, a new paragraph has been added to exclude
indemnity for damages that occur during the presence of the motor
carrier on the premises of the facility operator and that are caused by
the negligence or intentional acts or omissions of the indemnitees.
CU 22 38 12 01, Truckers—N amed Lessee as Insured—Notice of
Cancellation, provides that the named lessee will be given thirty days
advance notice if the policy is cancelled or liability coverage limits are
reduced.
CU 24 04 12 05, Financial Institutions—F iduciary Interest Only, is
an optional endorsement. It pertains to coverage for bodily injury,
property damage, and personal and advertising injury arising out of
the ownership, maintenance, or use of property in trust for which the
named insured is acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity.
CU 24 06 12 04, Fiduciaries—F iduciary Interest, adds fiduciary
coverage for banks or other financial institutions. This endorsement
also adds, as additional insureds, any cofiduciary or corepresentativeof the named insured with respect to acts or omissions as such; any
person or organization responsible for acts or omissions of the
named insured in a fiduciary or representative capacity; and any
beneficiary, devisee, ward, legatee, heir, or distributor of the trust,
guardianship or estate, and any coowner or life tenant of the
property, with respect to acts or omissions as such.
CU 24 09 03 05, Contractual Liability—R ailroads, pertains to
coverage for liability of a railroad assumed by the insured. If the
insured has not purchased a railroad protective liability policy, or if the
railroad has not requested that one be in place, this endorsement
provides coverage.
CU 24 14 09 00, Fellow Employee Auto Coverage, adds fellow
employee coverage for all of the named insured’s employees. Fellow
employee auto coverage for designated employees/positions can be
added by using CU 24 15 09 00, Fellow Employee Auto Coverage for
Designated Employees/Positions.
CU 24 16 09 00, Broad Form Products Coverage, eliminates the
exclusion for property damage to the named insured’s products.
CU 24 17 02 02, Individual Named Insured—Auto Coverage,
provides coverage for a private passenger type auto that is not used
for public transportation or rented to others, or a pickup or van not
used in the business of the named insured.
CU 24 18 12 01, Repossessed Autos, applies to auto finance
companies and banks that, in the course of business, repossess and
resell financed autos.
CU 24 19 12 01, Lessor—Additional Insured and Loss Payee,
pertains to additional insured status for a lessor of leased autos. The
lessor is listed on the schedule of the endorsement and, the insurerpromises, if the policy is cancelled by the insurer, to mail notice to the
lessor in accordance with the cancellation common policy conditions.
And, if the named insured cancels the policy, the insurer will mail
notice to the lessor.
CU 24 20 09 00, Broadened Bodily Injury Definition, is an
endorsement that broadens the definition of bodily injury by removing
the “resulting from bodily injury” language in the umbrella policy
definition. Mental anguish or other mental injury standing alone is
considered bodily injury through the use of this endorsement.
CU 24 23 12 07, Coverage for Professional Services, eliminates
the exclusion relating to professional services.
CU 24 31 04 13, Limited Contractual Liability—R ailroads, is an
optional endorsement that replaces the definition of “insured contract”
on the umbrella policy. The part of the standard definition of “insured
contract” pertaining to any easement or license agreement contains
an exception in connection with construction or demolition operations
on or within fifty feet or a railroad. This endorsement deletes that
exception so that any easement or license agreement is now
considered to be an insured contract. This endorsement applies only
with respect to operations performed for or affecting a scheduled
railroad at a designated job site shown in the schedule on the
endorsement.
CU 24 32 04 13, Limited Coverage Territory, is an optional
endorsement that replaces the definition of “coverage territory.” The
Commercial Liability Umbrella Policy provides worldwide coverage for
bodily injury or property damage caused by an occurrence. This
endorsement limits the coverage territory to that as defined on the
CGL form, CG 00 01. There are two other endorsements in this vein:
CU 24 33 04 13, Limited Coverage Territory—A dditional Scheduled
Countries, and CU 24 35 04 13, Amendment of Coverage Territory—
Worldwide Coverage with Specified Exceptions. CU 24 33 defines“coverage territory” the same as CU 24 32, but then allows the
insured to add specified additional countries; so, the coverage
territory is basically extended to include any countries listed in the
schedule of the endorsement. CU 24 35 amends the worldwide
coverage provided in the umbrella policy to preclude specific
countries listed in the schedule; in other words, the coverage territory
is worldwide except for those countries specified in the schedule on
the endorsement.
CU 24 36 12 05, Products-Completed Operations Aggregate Limit
of Insurance, is an optional endorsement that provides a separate
aggregate limit for the products-completed operations hazard. The
umbrella policy contains a single aggregate limit that applies to all
ultimate net loss under coverage A (bodily injury and property
damage liability), and coverage B (personal and advertising injury
liability). CU 24 36 12 05 provides a separate aggregate limit that will
apply to all ultimate net loss under coverage A for damages because
of bodily injury or property damage included in the products-
completed operations hazard.
CU 24 37 12 05, Non-Concurrency of Policy Periods—R etained
Limit, is a mandatory endorsement that revises the limits of insurance
clause in the umbrella policy. This clause does not address how the
retained limit is impacted when underlying insurance is reduced or
exhausted by occurrences that occur prior to the policy period of CU
00 01. CU 24 37 revises the clause to indicate that if there is
underlying insurance with a policy period that is not concurrent with
the policy period of the umbrella policy, then the retained limit will only
be reduced or exhausted if the injury or damage occurred or was
committed during the policy period of the umbrella policy. If the policy
period of the underlying insurance is not concurrent with the policy
period of the umbrella policy, this may mean a reduction in coverage.
CU 27 10 04 13, Extended Reporting Period Endorsement for
Employee Benefits Liability Coverage, applies to the employeebenefits liability coverage endorsement, noted previously. CU 27 10
simply provides an extended period during which a claim may be
made under the employee benefits endorsement. CU 27 10 will not
take effect unless the additional premium for it is paid when due.Chapter 9
Commercial Excess Liability
Coverage Form
Insurance Services Office (ISO) has developed the Commercial
Excess Liability Coverage Form, CX 00 01 04 13, which was
introduced as a part of the commercial umbrella liability program. The
form was designed to sit atop various ISO and independent company
policies, including general liability, commercial auto, employers
liability, and businessowners. CX 00 01 declares that coverage will
follow the same provisions, exclusions, and limitations that are
contained in the applicable “controlling underlying insurance” (a
defined term), unless otherwise directed by the excess coverage
form. Moreover, the coverage provided by CX 00 01 will not be
broader than that provided by the applicable controlling underlying
insurance.
This chapter offers a general overview of CX 00 01. The
coverages, exclusions, conditions, and definitions of the form are
noted and analyzed.
Section I—Coverages
1.    Insuring Agreement
a.    We will pay on behalf of the insured the “ultimate net
loss” in excess of the “retained limit” because of “injuryor damage” to which insurance provided under this
Coverage Part applies.
We will have the right and duty to defend the insured
against any suit seeking damages for such “injury or
damage” when the applicable limits of “controlling
underlying insurance” have been exhausted in
accordance with the provisions of such “controlling
underlying insurance”.
When we have no duty to defend, we will have the right
to defend, or to participate in the defense of, the
insured against any other suit seeking damages for
“injury or damage”. However, we will have no duty to
defend the insured against any suit seeking damages
for which insurance under this policy does not apply.
At our discretion, we may investigate any “event” that
may involve this insurance and settle any resultant
claim or suit, for which we have the duty to defend.
But:
(1)    The amount we will pay for “ultimate net loss” is
limited as described in Section II—Limits Of
Insurance; and
(2)    Our right and duty to defend ends when we have
used up the applicable limit of insurance in the
payment of judgments or settlements under this
Coverage Part. However, if the policy of
“controlling underlying insurance” specifies that
limits are reduced by defense expenses, our right
and duty to defend ends when we have used up
the applicable limit of insurance in the payment ofdefense expenses, judgments or settlements
under this Coverage Part.
b.    This insurance applies to “injury or damage” that is
subject to an applicable “retained limit”. If any other
limit, such as a sublimit, is specified in the “controlling
underlying insurance”, this insurance does not apply to
“injury or damage” arising out of that exposure unless
that limit is specified in the Declarations under the
Schedule of “controlling underlying insurance”.
c.    If the “controlling underlying insurance” requires, for a
particular claim, that the “injury or damage” occur
during its policy period in order for that coverage to
apply, then this insurance will only apply to that “injury
or damage” if it occurs during the policy period of this
Coverage Part. If the “controlling underlying insurance”
requires that the “event” causing the particular “injury or
damage” takes place during its policy period in order
for that coverage to apply, then this insurance will
apply to the claim only if the “event” causing that “injury
or damage” takes place during the policy period of this
Coverage Part.
d.    Any additional insured under any policy of “controlling
underlying insurance” will automatically be an additional
insured under this insurance. If coverage provided to
the additional insured is required by a contract or
agreement, the most we will pay on behalf of the
additional insured is the amount of insurance required
by the contract, less any amounts payable by any
“controlling underlying insurance”.
Additional insured coverage provided by this insurance
will not be broader than coverage provided by the“controlling underlying insurance”.
The insuring agreement explains that the insured agrees to pay on
behalf of the insured the ultimate net loss (that is, the total sum, after
reduction for recoveries, or salvages collectible, that the insured
becomes legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of
settlements, judgments, binding arbitration, or any other binding
alternate dispute resolution proceeding entered into with the insurer’s
consent). The ultimate net loss includes defense expenses if the
underlying insurance specifies that limits are reduced by defense
expenses.
This portion of the policy also describes when the insured has a
right and duty to defend the insured. The insurer has a right to defend
against any suit seeking damages for injury or damage when the
applicable limits of the controlling underlying insurance have been
exhausted. When the insurer has no duty to defend, it will still have
the right to defend, or to participate in the defense of, the insured
against any other suit seeking damages. The insurer, of course, has
no duty to defend the insured against any suit seeking damages for
which insurance under excess liability coverage does not apply. The
policy also gives the insurer the right to investigate any occurrence,
offense, accident, act, or other event, to which the applicable
controlling underlying insurance applies.
Section I also explains that the insurance applies to injury or
damage subject to an applicable retained limit (the available limits of
controlling underlying insurance applicable to the claim).
The insuring agreement refers to both when “injury or damage”
occur, and when the “event causing the particular injury or damage”
takes place; both, of course are required to happen during the policy
period of both the underlying insurance and the excess liability
coverage form. In other words, if the underlying insurance requires
that the injury occur during the policy period in order for its coverageto apply, the excess policy does likewise and will only apply to the
injury that occurs during the excess policy period. If the underlying
insurance will apply if the event causing the injury occurs during its
policy period, and not the actual injury itself, the excess policy
coverage will apply to the claim only if the event takes place during its
policy period.
CX 00 01 also provides that additional insureds listed on the
controlling underlying insurance are automatically considered
additional insureds under the excess policy. The excess coverage will
not be any broader than it is under the controlling underlying
insurance. Note that if coverage provided to the additional insured is
required by a contract or agreement, the most the excess insurer will
pay on behalf of the additional insured is the amount required by the
contract (less any amounts payable by a controlling underlying
insurance). In other words, the excess insurer is making its coverage
amount for additional insureds contingent on what is being required in
a contract or agreement, so the coverage amount should be clearly
listed and understood by the parties involved in the agreement.
2.    Exclusions
The following exclusions, and any other exclusions added by
endorsement, apply to this Coverage Part. In addition, the
exclusions applicable to any “controlling underlying insurance”
apply to this insurance unless superseded by the following
exclusions, or superseded by any other exclusions added by
endorsement to this Coverage Part.
Insurance provided under this Coverage Part does not apply
to:
a.    Medical PaymentsMedical payments coverage or expenses that are
provided without regard to fault, whether or not
provided by the applicable “controlling underlying
insurance”.
b.    Auto
Any loss, cost or expense payable under or resulting
from any of the following auto coverages:
(1)    First-party physical damage coverage;
(2)    No-fault coverage;
(3)    Personal injury protection or auto medical
payments coverage; or
(4)    Uninsured or underinsured motorists coverage.
c.    Pollution
(1)    “Injury or damage” which would not have
occurred, in whole or in part, but for the actual,
alleged or threatened discharge, dispersal,
seepage, migration, release or escape of
pollutants at any time.
(2)    Any loss, cost or expense arising out of any:
(a)    Request, demand, order or statutory or
regulatory requirement that any insured or
others test for, monitor, clean up, remove,
contain, treat, detoxify or neutralize, or in
any way respond to, or assess the effects
of, pollutants; or(b)    Claim or suit by or on behalf of a
governmental authority for damages
because of testing for, monitoring, cleaning
up, removing, containing, treating,
detoxifying or neutralizing, or in any way
responding to, or assessing the effects of,
pollutants.
This exclusion does not apply to the extent that
valid “controlling underlying insurance” for the
pollution liability risks described above exists or
would have existed but for the exhaustion of
underlying limits for “injury or damage”. Medical
payments coverage or expenses that are provided
without regard to fault, whether or not provided by
the applicable “controlling underlying insurance”.
d.    Workers’ Compensation and Similar Laws
Any obligation of the insured under a workers’
compensation, disability benefits or unemployment
compensation law or any similar law.
The exclusions section of CX 00 01 notes that the exclusions
applicable to any controlling underlying insurance also apply to the
excess coverage; in other words, the excess liability policy can be
said to “follow form”. This is so, unless the exclusions listed in CX 00
01 supersede those in the underlying insurance.
Note that CX 00 01 does not provide medical payments
regardless of whether the underlying insurance does so.
The auto exclusion in CX 00 01 precludes coverage for auto
physical damage coverage, no-fault coverage, personal injuryprotection coverage, and uninsured/underinsured motorists coverage,
just like the commercial liability umbrella coverage form, CU 00 01.
The pollution exclusion is an absolute pollution exclusion with no
stated exceptions. The exclusion uses the “would not have occurred
but for …” language to reinforce its total nature. And yet, CX 00 01
then declares that, if controlling underlying coverage exists for
pollution liability, its pollution exclusion does not apply to that extent.
Section II—Limits of Insurance
1.    The Limits of Insurance shown in the Declarations, and the
rules below fix the most we will pay regardless of the number
of:
a.    Insureds;
b.    Claims made or suits brought, or number of vehicles
involved;
c.    Persons or organizations making claims or bringing
suits; or
d.    Limits available under any “controlling underlying
insurance”.
2.    The Limits of Insurance of this Coverage Part will apply as
follows:
a.    This insurance only applies in excess of the “retained
limit”.
b.    The Aggregate Limit is the most we will pay for the
sum of all “ultimate net loss”, for all “injury or damage”
covered under this Coverage Part.However, this Aggregate Limit only applies to “injury or
damage” that is subject to an aggregate limit of
insurance under the “controlling underlying insurance”.
c.    Subject to Paragraph 2.b. above, the Each
Occurrence Limit is the most we will pay for the sum of
all “ultimate net loss” under this insurance because of
all “injury or damage: arising out of any one “event”.
d.    If the Limits of Insurance of the “controlling underlying
insurance” are reduced by defense expenses by the
terms of that policy, any payments for defense
expenses we will make will reduce our applicable
Limits of Insurance in the same manner.
3.    If any “controlling underlying insurance” has a policy period
that is different from the policy period of this Coverage Part
then, for the purposes of this insurance, the “retained limit” will
only be reduced or exhausted by payments made for “injury or
damage” covered under this insurance.
The Aggregate Limit of this Coverage Part applies separately to
each consecutive annual period of this Coverage Part and to any
remaining period of this Coverage Part of less than twelve months,
starting with the beginning of the policy period shown in the
Declarations, unless the policy period is extended after issuance for
an additional period of less than twelve months. In that case, the
additional period will be deemed part of the last preceding period for
purposes of determining the Limits of Insurance.
This section of the policy establishes the most that the insurer will
pay for a claim or lawsuit against the insured; and, in keeping with the
excess coverage afforded by CX 00 01, the insurance only applies in
excess of the retained limit (the available limits of controlling
underlying insurance applicable to the claim). The limits that are seton the declarations page of the excess liability policy will not be
exceeded regardless of the number of insureds, claims, or number of
vehicles involved.
The limits of insurance section notes that the policy has an
aggregate limit and an each occurrence limit. The aggregate limit is
the sum of all ultimate net loss covered under the policy. Note that
this limit only applies to injury or damage that is subject to an
aggregate limit of insurance under the controlling underlying
insurance. In other words, the injury or damage has to be subject to
an aggregate limit in the underlying insurance policy before the
aggregate limit in CX 00 01 comes into play.
The each occurrence limit simply points out that that is the most
the excess insurer will pay because of all injury or damage arising out
of any one event. In other words, if the excess policy has an
aggregate limit of $2 million and an each occurrence limit of
$500,000, the $500,000 is the most the policy will pay for all injuries
and damages arising out of one event. Then, if three more, separate
occurrences happen, the most that would be paid for those separate
occurrences would be $500,000 each. If those separate occurrences
eventually add up to the $2 million aggregate, the insured will be on
his own when it comes to paying the claims.
As for defense expenses, if the underlying insurance policy states
that defense costs reduce the stated limits of insurance on that
policy, the excess policy will follow suit.
Section III—Conditions
The following conditions apply. In addition, the conditions
applicable to any “controlling underlying insurance” are also applicable
to the coverage provided under this insurance unless superseded by
the following conditions.1.    Appeals
If the “controlling underlying insurer” or insured elects not to
appeal a judgment in excess of the “retained limit”, we may do
so at our own expense. We will also pay for taxable court
costs, pre- and post- judgment interest and disbursements
associated with such appeal. In no event will this provision
increase our liability beyond the applicable Limits of Insurance
described in Section II—Limits of Insurance.
2.    Bankruptcy
a.    Bankruptcy of Insured
Bankruptcy or insolvency of the insured or of the
insured’s estate will not relieve us of our obligations
under this Coverage Part.
b.    Bankruptcy of Controlling Underlying Insurer
Bankruptcy or insolvency of the “controlling underlying
insurer” will not relieve us of our obligations under this
Coverage Part.
However, insurance provided under this Coverage Part
will not replace any “controlling underlying insurance” in
the event of bankruptcy or insolvency of the “controlling
underlying insurer”. This insurance provided under this
Coverage Part will apply as if the “controlling
underlying insurance” were in full effect and
recoverable.
3.    Duties In the Event of an Event, Claim or Suita.    You must see to it that we are notified as soon as
practicable of an “event”, regardless of the amount,
which may result in a claim under this insurance. To the
extent possible, notice should include:
(1)    How, when and where the “event” took place;
(2)    The names and addresses of any injured persons
and witnesses; and
(3)    The nature and location of any “injury or damage”
arising out of the “event”.
b.    If a claim is made or suit is brought against any
insured, you must:
(1)    Immediately record the specifics of the claim or
suit and the date received; and
(2)    Notify us as soon as practicable.
You must see to it that we receive written notice
of the claim or suit as soon as practicable.
c.    You and any other insured involved must:
(1)    Immediately send us copies of any demands,
notices, summonses or legal papers received in
connection with the claim or suit;
(2)    Authorize us to obtain records and other
information;
(3)    Cooperate with us in the investigation or
settlement of the claim or defense against thesuit; and
(4)    Assist us, upon our request, in the enforcement of
any right against any person or organization which
may be liable to the insured because of “injury or
damage” to which this insurance may also apply.
d.    No insured will, except at that insured’s own cost,
voluntarily make a payment, assume any obligation, or
incur any expense, other than for first aid, without our
consent.
CX 00 01 offers many of the same conditions as the CGL policy
and the commercial umbrella policy.
Among the conditions listed is the bankruptcy provision, which
explains that the policy will not relieve the insurer of its obligations
under the excess policy in the event the controlling underlying insurer
(or the insured) becomes insolvent or goes bankrupt. This clause also
declares that the bankruptcy of the underlying insurer does not mean
that the excess insurer will replace the controlling underlying
insurance; the excess insurance will apply as if the controlling
underlying insurance were in full effect and recoverable. In other
words, the excess insurer is saying that its policy is not intended to
drop down and take the place of the underlying insurer in case the
underlying insurer files for bankruptcy or becomes insolvent.
The policy also affords the insurer the right to appeal judgments,
in excess of the limits of underlying insurance, even if the controlling
underlying insurer or the insured chooses not to appeal. The excess
insurer agrees to pay for the expenses of such an appeal, along with
taxable costs, prejudgment and post judgment interest, and
disbursements associated with the appeal; these agreed-upon
payments will not increase the excess insurer’s liability beyond the
applicable limits stated in the limits of insurance section of the policy.Another provision here explains the specific duties of the insured in
case of an event (an occurrence, offense, accident, or act to which
the applicable controlling underlying insurance applies) that may result
in a claim under CX 00 01. These include the duty to notify the insurer
of an event as soon as practicable (a term that usually has to be
determined by a court based on the facts of the situation), and the
duty to refrain from making voluntary payments without the insurer’s
consent.
4.    First Named Insured Duties
The first Named Insured is the person or organization first
named in the Declarations and is responsible for the payment
of all premiums. The first Named Insured will act on behalf of
all other Named Insureds for giving and receiving of notice of
cancellation or the receipt of any return premium that may
become payable.
At our request, the first Named Insured will furnish us, as soon
as practicable, with a complete copy of any “controlling
underlying insurance” and any subsequently issued
endorsements or policies which may in any way affect the
insurance provided under this Coverage Part.
5.    Cancellation
a.    The first Named Insured shown in the Declarations
may cancel this policy by mailing or delivering to us
advance written notice of cancellation.
b.    We may cancel this policy by mailing or delivering to
the first Named Insured written notice of cancellation at
least:(1)    10 days before the effective date of cancellation
if we cancel for nonpayment of premium; or
(2)    30 days before the effective date of cancellation
if we cancel for any other reason.
c.    We will mail or deliver our notice to the first Named
Insured’s last mailing address known to us.
d.    Notice of cancellation will state the effective date of
cancellation. The policy period will end on that date.
e.    If this policy is cancelled, we will send the first Named
Insured any premium refund due. If we cancel, the
refund will be pro rata. If the first Named Insured
cancels, the refund may be less than pro rata. The
cancellation will be effective even if we have not made
or offered a refund.
f.     If notice is mailed, proof of mailing will be sufficient
proof of notice.
6.    Changes
This Coverage Part contains all the agreements between you
and us concerning the insurance afforded. The first Named
Insured is authorized by all other insureds to make changes in
the terms of this Coverage Part with our consent. This
Coverage Part’s terms can be amended or waived only by
endorsement.
7.    Maintenance of/Changes to Controlling Underlying Insurance
Any “controlling underlying insurance” must be maintained in full
effect without reduction of coverage or limits except for thereduction of aggregate limits in accordance with the provisions
of such “controlling underlying insurance” that results from
“injury or damage” to which this insurance applies.
Such exhaustion or reduction is not a failure to maintain
“controlling underlying insurance”. Failure to maintain
“controlling underlying insurance” will not invalidate insurance
provided under this coverage Part, but insurance provided
under this Coverage Part will apply as if the “controlling
underlying insurance” were in full effect.
The first Named Insured must notify us in writing, as soon as
practicable, if any “controlling underlying insurance” is
cancelled, not renewed, replaced or otherwise terminated, or
if the limits or scope of coverage of any “controlling underlying
insurance” is changed.
8.    Other Insurance
a.    This insurance is excess over, and shall not contribute
with any other insurance, whether primary, excess,
contingent or on any other basis. This condition will not
apply to insurance specifically written as excess over
this Coverage Part.
When this insurance is excess, if no other insurer
defends, we may undertake to do so, but we will be
entitled to the insured’s rights against all those other
insurers.
b.    When this insurance is excess over other insurance,
we will pay only our share of the “ultimate net loss” that
exceeds the sum of:(1)    The total amount that all such other insurance
would pay for the loss in the absence of the
insurance provided under this Coverage Part; and
(2)    The total of all deductibles and self-insured
amounts under all that other insurance.
Note that CX 00 01 specifically sets out duties for the first named
insured. The excess policy has already listed other duties for “you”, a
term that CX 00 01 has already identified as the named insured
shown in the declarations; however, for whatever reasons, CX 00 01
goes on to specify duties for the first named insured. These duties
include being responsible for the payment of all premiums and the
giving and receiving of notice of cancellation. (These duties for the
first named insured are usually found in the common policy conditions
form, IL 00 17.) The first named insured also has the duty, upon a
request from the excess insurer, to furnish to the excess insurer a
complete copy of any controlling underlying insurance and any
subsequently issued endorsements that may affect the coverage
provided by CX 00 01. (There is no provision here that spells out the
consequences for coverage if the first named insured does not have a
complete copy of the underlying insurance policy.)
Note that the cancellation and changes conditions single out the
actions that the first named insured may take under the terms of this
excess policy; again, the actions usually listed in IL 00 17.
Another provision requires the maintenance of underlying
insurance. Failure to maintain controlling underlying insurance will not
invalidate the excess policy coverage, but the excess insurer will
apply the insurance of the excess policy as if the controlling
underlying insurance were in full effect (in other words, no drop
down). The first named insured has the duty to notify the excess
insurer in writing, as soon as practicable, if any controlling underlyinginsurance is cancelled, not renewed, or terminated, or if the limits or
scope of coverage of any controlling underlying insurance is changed.
The other insurance clause makes the points that CX 00 01 is
excess over any other insurance, but if no other insurer defends the
insured, the excess insurer may undertake that duty. In such an
instance, the insured’s rights against the other insurer(s) pass on to
the excess insurer.
9.    Premium Audit.
a.    We will compute all premiums for this Coverage Part
in accordance with our rules and rates.
b.    If this policy is auditable, the premium shown in this
Coverage Part as advance premium is a deposit
premium only. At the close of each audit period, we will
compute the earned premium for that period and send
notice to the first Named Insured. The due date for
audit premium is the date shown as the due date on
the bill. If the sum of the advance and audit premiums
paid for the policy period is greater than the earned
premium, we will return the excess to the first Named
Insured.
c.    The first Named Insured must keep records of the
information we need for premium computation, and
send us copies at such times as we may request.
10.  Loss Payable
Liability under this Coverage Part does not apply to a given
claim unless and until:a.    The insured or insured’s “controlling underlying insurer”
has become obligated to pay the “retained limit”; and
b.    The obligation of the insured to pay the “ultimate net
loss” in excess of the retained limit” has been
determined by a final settlement or judgment or written
agreement among the insured, claimant, “controlling
underlying insurer” (or a representative of one or more
of these) and us.
11.  Legal Action against Us
No person or organization has a right under this Coverage
Part:
a.    To join us as a party or otherwise bring us into a suit
asking for damages from an insured; or
b.    To sue us on this Coverage Part unless all of its terms
have been fully complied with.
A person or organization may sue us to recover on an
agreed settlement or on a final judgment against an
insured; but we will not be liable for damages that are
not payable under the terms of this Coverage Part or
that are in excess of the applicable limit of insurance.
An agreed settlement means a settlement and release
of liability signed by us, the insured, “controlling
underlying insurer” and the claimant or the claimant’s
legal representative.
12.  Transfer of Defense
a.    Defense Transferred to UsWhen the limits of “controlling underlying insurance”
have been exhausted, in accordance with the
provisions of “controlling underlying insurance”, we may
elect to have the defense transferred to us. We will
cooperate in the transfer of control to us of any
outstanding claims or suits seeking damages to which
this insurance applies which would have been covered
by the “controlling underlying insurance” had the
applicable limit not been exhausted.
b.    Defense Transferred by Us
When our limits of insurance have been exhausted our
duty to provide a defense will cease.
We will cooperate in the transfer of control of defense
to any insurer specifically written as excess over this
Coverage Part of any outstanding claims or suits
seeking damages to which this insurance applies and
which would have been covered by the “controlling
underlying insurance” had the applicable limit not been
exhausted.
In the event that there is no insurance written as
excess over this Coverage Part, we will cooperate in
the transfer of control to the insured and its designated
representative.
13.    When We Do Not Renew
If we decide not to renew this Coverage Part, we will mail or
deliver to the first Named Insured shown in the Declarations
written notice of the nonrenewal not less than thirty days
before the expiration date.If notice is mailed, proof of mailing will be sufficient proof of
notice.
The premium audit condition is standard wording.
The loss payable condition declares that CX 00 01 is not going to
apply to a given claim unless and until the insured or the insured’s
controlling underlying insurer has become obligated to pay the
retained limit (the available limits of controlling underlying insurance
applicable to the claim). Furthermore, the obligation of the insured to
pay the ultimate net loss in excess of the retained limit has to be
determined by a final judgment (after any appeal has been answered)
or written agreement among the parties to the event, that is, the
insured, the claimant, the controlling underlying insurer, and the
excess insurer.
Of note is the provision stating that when the controlling underlying
limits of insurance have been exhausted in the payment of judgments
or settlements, the excess insurer may elect to have the defense
transferred to it. The controlling underlying insurance policy has a
declaration that its duty to defend ends when the applicable limit of
insurance is used up, so this particular provision tells the insured that
his defense is still being handled by an insurer.
The transfer of defense condition also states that when the
excess insurer’s limits of insurance have been exhausted, its duty to
provide a defense ends. The excess insurer does promise to
cooperate in the transfer of control of defense to any insurer
specifically written as excess over CX 00 01. If there is no insurance
written as excess, the insurer agrees to cooperate in the transfer of
control to the insured and its designated representative.
Section IV—DefinitionsThe definitions applicable to any “controlling underlying insurance”
also apply to this insurance. In addition, the following definitions
apply.
1.    “Controlling underlying insurance” means any policy of
insurance or self-insurance listed in the Declarations under the
Schedule of “controlling underlying insurance”.
2.    “Controlling underlying insurer” means any insurer who
provides any policy of insurance listed in the Declarations
under the Schedule of “controlling underlying insurance”.
3.    “Event” means an occurrence, offense, accident, act, or other
event, to which the applicable “controlling underlying insurance”
applies.
4.    “Injury or Damage” means any injury or damage covered in
the applicable “controlling underlying insurance” arising from an
“event”.
5.    “Retained limit” means the available limits of “controlling
underlying insurance” applicable to the claim.
6.    “Ultimate net loss” means the total sum, after reduction for
recoveries, or salvages collectible, that the insured becomes
legally obligated to pay as damages by reason of:
a.    Settlements, judgments, binding arbitration; or
b.    Other binding alternate dispute resolution proceeding
entered into with our consent.
“Ultimate net loss” includes defense expenses if the
“controlling underlying insurance” specifies that limits
are reduced by defense expenses.CX 00 01 notes at the beginning of its definitions section that the
definitions applicable to any controlling underlying insurance also
apply to CX 00 01. So, terms like “bodily injury”, “employee”,
“property damage”, “pollutants”, and “your product” have the same
meaning in the excess policy as they do in the underlying insurance
policy.
The controlling underlying insurance is any policy of insurance or
self-insurance listed in the declarations of CX 00 01. This would
include policies like the general liability policy and the auto policy.
Note that the 2013 edition of CX 00 01 revised the definition of
“event” to remove the word “occurrence” from quotation marks. The
word “occurrence” is not a defined term on CX 00 01.
CX 00 01 applies to the ultimate net loss. As noted previously, the
ultimate net loss means the total sum, after reduction for recoveries,
or salvages collectible, that the insured becomes legally obligated to
pay as damages by reason of settlements, judgments, binding
arbitration, or other binding alternate dispute resolution proceeding
entered into with the consent of the excess insurer. So, CX 00 01 will
pay the amount that the insured owes for a claim in excess of the
amount retained by the insured, either through an underlying
insurance policy or through self-insurance.Chapter 10
Businessowners Liability
Compared with CGL Coverage
Often a small business owner will hunt for an insurance policy that
specifically fits the needs of their company. There are generally two
ways to insure against liability in a small business, the occurrence
version of ISO’s Commercial General Liability (CGL) policy and the
liability section of ISO’s businessowners policy. The Businessowners
Coverage form was first introduced in 2002. It is a type of
commercial insurance that is specifically designed to insure small to
medium-sized businesses. It is a desirable policy because it bundles
general liability insurance and property insurance into a single policy,
generally providing for a small premium due to the cost-efficiency of
purchasing a bundle of policies, as opposed to purchasing several
policies separately.
Both policies essentially have the same scope of coverage for
premises and operations, products and completed operations,
advertising and personal injury, and medical payments. Also, both
policies can be customized to fit the insureds business using
endorsements.1
The two policies have some differences that are outlined in detail
later in this chapter. In short, a commercial general liability policy
offers protection against most liability that small businessowners
might face. It applies when a third-party sues for bodily injuries
suffered on the business premises, property damage that the insuredcauses while doing “your work”, or advertising or personal injuries. In
contrast, businessowners policy includes all of the coverage for the
CGL policy and also has property insurance and most versions
compensate for business interruptions. The BOP sounds like a much
more comprehensive CGL policy, and includes several coverage
types that can come at a less expensive price than purchasing all of
the coverages separately. This chapter contains the Businessowners
policy language and compares it to the Commercial General Liability
policy language with which we are already familiar.
Business Liability Coverage
The liability section of the Businessowners policy lies in Section II.
From first glance, the most noticeable difference between the liability
section of the Businessowners form and the CGL is format. As we
have discussed the CGL is split up into different coverages, coverage
A, bodily injury and property damage, coverage B, personal and
advertising injury, and coverage C, medical payments coverage. In
the Businessowners form bodily injury and property damage liability,
advertising and personal injury, and medical payments are all insured
under one coverage referred to as “business liability.”
The current Businessowners form, like the CGL form, states that
the insurance applies only if no insured or employee authorized to
receive notice of an occurrence or claim knew prior to the policy
period that bodily injury or property damage had occurred. If any of
these listed insureds or employees had such knowledge, any
continuation of the bodily injury or property damage will be
considered to have been known before the policy period and
therefore will not be covered.
However, bodily injury or property damage that occurs during the
policy period, and was not known to have occurred prior to the policy
period, includes any continuation of the injury or damage occurring
after the end of the policy period.There are three ways injury or damage may be deemed to have
been known to occur. First, the injury or damage is reported to the
insurer. Second, an insured or another authorized person receives
written or verbal claim for damages because of the injury or property
damage. Third, an insured or other authorized person becomes
aware by any other means—a breaking news story, perhaps—that
injury or damage has occurred. Damages claimed because of bodily
injury include damages claimed by any other person for care, loss of
services, or death resulting from bodily injury.
Supplementary Payments
In the supplementary payments section the insurer promises to
pay the cost of investigation and defense of a claim or suit. Additional
payments under the supplemental payments coverage extension
include up to $250 for bail bonds required because of accidents or
violations involving a vehicle to which businessowners liability
coverage applies. Loss of earnings are paid up to $250 per day, but
are limited to lost income incurred by an insureds assistance in the
investigation or defense at the insurer’s request. Costs taxed against
the insured, prejudgment interest against the insured, and interest
accrued after entry of a judgment and before the insurer has paid are
included. Attorneys’ fees and expenses are clearly not covered.
Contractual liability, where the insured has assumed the liability of
another, has many applicable supplementary payments provisions. In
order to be covered, the suit must name both the insured and the
insured’s indemnitee and must seek damages for which the insured
has assumed liability under a contract. Then the insurer agrees to
defend the indemnitee, but only if certain conditions are met. Those
conditions include (i) the insurance must apply to such liability (ii)
there is no conflict of interest between the insured and the indemnitee
(iii) the insured and the indemnitee must allow the insurer to direct the
defense of the suit and provide the same counsel for both and (iv) the
indemnitee must agree in writing to cooperate with the insurer.When the applicable limit of insurance has been met in the
payment of a judgment or settlement, or if the conditions of the
agreement are no longer being met the insurer’s obligation to the
indemnitee ends.
Medical Expenses
The medical expenses insuring agreement section is identical to
the one in the CGL form, but the businessowners policy has the
applicable exclusions listed later in the policy. For coverage to apply
an accident has to occur during the policy period and within the
coverage territory as defined. The accident must occur on premises
owned by or rented to the insured business, on ways next to the
owned or rented premises, or occur due to the insured’s operations.
For example, an insured business might be applicable sales and
installation. If the insured employee is installing a refrigerator for a
customer and accidently drops the refrigerator on the customers’ foot
during installation, the medical expenses arising out of this accident
would be covered. Payments are available regardless of fault or
negligence on anyone’s part. So if the customer in the example above
was asked to move but failed to do so, the payments would still be
available up to the limit of liability (listed in section II; $5,000 on a per
person basis.)
Business Liability Exclusions
The liability section of the businessowners form is very similar to
the liability section of the CGL form. Exception (1) to exclusion (b)
encompasses contractual liability exposures, and goes on to depict
the liability the insured would have if no contract existed. Exception
(2) states that if the insured has assumed the liability of another, but
would be liable for bodily injury or property damage even if no
contract existed, the contractual liability exclusion does not apply.
Exclusion (c) liquor liability only applies if the insured business isrelated to distributing, selling, manufacturing, serving, or furnishing
alcoholic beverages. Liability that arises from an incident involving
alcohol, such as an office picnic, would be covered as long as the
alcohol does not play a role in the insured business.
The 2013 form added language to clarify that allowing customers
to bring alcoholic beverages to the insured premises in order to
consume that beverage is not by itself participating in a business
relating to alcohol. You may have dined at a restaurant where
customers were permitted to bring alcoholic beverages to the
restaurant in order to have a drink with their meal. Places like this do
not have a liquor license but do allow customers to bring insured
premises for the purpose of consuming the beverages, although they
do not serve alcohol on the premises. These restaurants would not
necessarily be subject to the liquor liability exclusion. The 2013
version of the form also explained that even if a claim alleges
negligence or wrongdoing in the supervision, hiring, employment,
training, or monitoring of others by the insured or in providing or failing
to provide transportation with respect to a person under the influence
of alcohol, the exclusion does still apply.
ISO considered several court cases prior to altering the liquor
liability exclusion including; Penn-America Ins. Co. v. Peccadillos, 27
A.3d (Pa. Super. Ct. 2011), in which the court ruled that the insurer
owed a duty to defend under a CGL policy when the insured
continued to serve alcohol to visibly intoxicated patrons and ejected
them from the premises, after which the intoxicated persons caused
an accident; McGuire v. Curry, 766 N.W.2d 501 (S.D. 2009), in which
the court ruled than an employer could be held liable for the actions of
its underage employee when allowed access to alcoholic beverages
on the job; Essex Ins. Co. v. Cafe Dupont, LLC, 674 F.Supp.2d 166
(D.D.C. 2009), in which the court stated that a provision in the
insured’s CGL policy applied to injuries arising out of the failure to
detain any intoxicated person or to provide transportation, not just
those who became intoxicated at the insured’s establishment; andSimons v. Homatas, 925 N.E.2d 1089 (Ill. 2010), in which the court
said that even if a club provides glasses and ice to patrons who bring
their own alcoholic beverages, that did not mean that the club was in
the business of selling liquor.
Workers Compensation
Since workers compensation exposures are intended to be
covered under workers compensation and employer liability policies
that coverage is excluded from businessowners and CGL policies.
Most of the fifty United States statutorily require that businesses
purchase workers compensation insurance, so coverage of that sort
is not provided here. Exclusion e. also eliminates some coverage for
third-party over suits, which are suits that accompany incidents when
an employee is injured and sues someone other than the employer for
damages, and that party turns around and sues the employer. For
example, if an employee was doing a delivery from a parts store to
an auto-body shop and slips on spilt oil when walking into the shop
garage, the employee can sue the shop for negligent maintenance of
the premises while the shop in turn can sue the original employer for
negligent hiring, sending a clumsy employee to make the delivery. In
this case coverage will probably not be found under the
businessowners form, nor would coverage be found under the CGL
form. There is an exception to exclusion e., though, that allows
coverage for any liability assumed by the insured under an insured
contract.
Pollution
The pollution exclusion has been through significant revision
throughout the different versions of the businessowners form. Over
time, the definitions of “pollutants” and “hostile fire” were added,
exceptions were moved to be near the exclusion to which they refer,
and new coverages were added. Now there is coverage for bodilyinjury caused by smoke, fumes, or vapor released by equipment used
to heat, cool, or dehumidify the building. Coverage is also provided
for bodily injury or property damage arising out of pollutants if an
insured contractor is performing operations on a site or location
owned by another and that party has been added to the policy as an
additional insured. Another exception provides coverage for injury
arising out of the release or vapors from materials brought into a
building in connection with operations being performed by the insured
or a subcontractor. If the insured is painting the walls and the fumes
sicken workers inside the building then BP 00 03 and CG 00 01 will
provide coverage.
Coverage is precluded for pollutant cleanup or testing that the
insured undertakes without a coverage trigger. So if the insured
decides to clean up an oil spill that has soaked into the ground at the
insured premises because that action is mandated by a local
ordinance coverage will not be provided, but if a hostile fire causes
smoke damage to the building next-door, that loss is covered.
Aircraft, Auto or Watercraft
Part of the Aircraft, Auto, or Watercraft section deals with
negligent supervision and clarifies that the exclusion applies even if
coverage is sought for an accident based on the insureds negligent
hiring or training of the tortfeasor. In the past some courts have found
coverage because of allegations of general negligence so the CGL
form responded to a claim involving autos when such a claim should
have been dealt with by the auto form. Exceptions to this exclusion
include the operation of certain types of equipment even if they are
mounted on otherwise excluded vehicles. Coverage for bodily injury or
property damage arising out of the transportation of mobile
equipment should fall under an auto policy but mobile equipment used
in stunting or prearranged racing is excluded. If, on the other hand,
the mobile equipment is being used to prepare a track for a race and
someone was injured in the process, coverage would apply.War
The War exclusion excludes coverage for warlike actions by a
military force, and actions in hindering or defending an actual or
expected attack.
Professional Services
The businessowners liability form, unlike the CGL form, provides a
list of excluded professional services. Legal accounting or advertising
services, inspection or engineer services, medical surgical dental or
nursing services, optometry pharmacy or hearing aid services, and
body piercing are a few examples of professional services that are
excluded under the BOP. Earlier versions of the form excluded
druggists, but the current version no longer makes that exception.
The 2010 form added language to bolster the exclusion by expressly
addressing claims that allege negligence or wrongdoing in
employment, training, hiring, monitoring, or supervising others by an
insured. That change did not impact coverage.
Damage to Property
There is no coverage for property loaned to the insured or for
personal property in the care, custody, or control of the insured.
Coverage will be provided for property damage not caused by fire or
explosion that the named insured has rented for fewer than seven
consecutive days. Many exclusions do not apply in this situation.
Coverage under these policies was never intended to serve as a
warranty for the insureds defective work. Coverage is only excluded
for the specific part of the real property that the insured is working
on. If damage occurs to the rest of the property, coverage will be
provided. This exclusion also applies to on-going operations.
Damage to Your ProductThis exclusion excludes coverage when named insured’s own
product sustains damage because of a condition within the product
itself. An insured cannot rely on either the BOP or the CGL to restore
his damaged property.
Damage to Your Work
This exclusion applies to work that has been completed, not work
that is in progress, and it does not apply to work that has been
performed by a subcontractor on the insureds behalf.
Damage to Impaired Property or Property Not Physically
Injured
Impaired property is tangible property but does not include the
insured’s own work or product that can ono longer be used or is less
useful because it incorporates the insureds work or product.
Coverage is excluded for impaired property.
Recall of Products, Work, or Impaired Property
This type of loss is part of the cost of doing business. The insured
is assumed to be selling products that are fit for their intended
purpose and coverage will not be provided if the products aren’t fit.
This exclusion also precludes recovery by third parties who incur
expenses as a result of a recall, loss of use, or withdrawal.
Personal and Advertising
If an insured knows beforehand that an act will violate the rights of
another and result in injury there is no coverage. Likewise, there is no
coverage if the insured knows that something is false and publishes it
regardless.Electronic Data
Coverage is not impacted under this exclusion, it is included in the
form in order to provide clarification of the intent of the form.
Recording and Distribution of Material or Information in
Violation of Law
This exclusion reduces coverage in states where courts have
enabled coverage for the violation of the TCPA, CAN-SPAM, the Fair
Credit Reporting Act, and other similar laws.
Damage by Fire or Explosion
This exception provides fire legal liability coverage. Separate
amounts of insurance are available for this coverage.
Exclusions Applicable to Medical Expenses
No coverage is provided for anyone qualifying as an insured
except for volunteer workers. Volunteers are covered under this
policy but other workers are properly covered by workers
compensation. There is no coverage for a person who is injured while
on the part of the insured’s owned or rented premises normally
occupied by that person. It is up to that person to provide her own
medical insurance. There is no coverage for any person if benefits
must be provided under workers compensation. No coverage is
provided for bodily injury that would otherwise be excluded by CGL or
the BOP or while participating in physical exercises, games, sports,
or athletics.
Nuclear Energy ExclusionThe BOP includes the nuclear exclusion within the four corners of
the policy, while the nuclear exclusion must be added through an
endorsement to the CGL policy. The hazards presented by nuclear
material and the processing of nuclear material are not contemplated
within the businessowners program rate structure and are therefore
excluded.
Who Is an Insured
This section includes business organizations and who is
considered to be an insured within each organization. Insured status
is generally only enjoyed as long as the insured person is performing
duties with respect to the conduct of the insured business. A limited
liability company is operated by members and managers who are
immune from debts or liabilities attached to the company. Similar to a
partnership, an LLC’s earnings are passed through the company to
members and taxed at their own personal rate. Only the company’s
assets are at risk, not the personal assets of the owners.
Additional Insured
Volunteer workers are insureds while performing duties related to
the conduct of the insured business. While the same preclusions of
coverage apply in regards to other insureds, such as for bodily injury
to the named insured, they enjoy payments for medical expenses not
available to other insureds.
The definition of “employee” encompasses leased employees but
not temporary employees. Therefore, if an employee negligently
injured a temporary worker, presumably the employee would be
considered an insured for any resulting claim or suit, since the
exclusion applies to a co-“employee” as defined.Any claim made by a relative of an employee injured by a fellow
employee is not covered. Likewise, any claim to share damages
because of any injury as described is not covered. These exclusions
are in keeping with the workers compensation and employers liability
exclusions, since those claims properly fall to that coverage, not the
businessowners liability coverage or to CGL coverage.
Exclusion (1)(d) refers solely to the employee providing the
professional healthcare services (“professional healthcare” means
that provided by a nurse or doctor, not a fellow worker applying a
Band-Aid). Therefore, the named insured would be protected for any
liability arising from such an act. The named insured’s real estate
manager. Is considered an insured while acting in that capacity. This
section also addresses who is an insured upon the death of the
named insured.
Newly Acquired Organizations
The current CGL form provides limited coverage for newly
acquired organizations, but the BOP does not provide such
coverages. However, preclusion of coverage for past exposures is
identical to that same section in the CGL form. No coverage is
provided for conduct of any current partnership, past partnership,
joint venture, or LLC not shown as a named insured in the
declarations.
Limits of Insurance
This section advises that the limit of liability insurance as indicated
in the declarations is the most that will be paid regardless of the
number of insureds, claims made, suits brought, or persons making
the claims or bringing the suits. The sum of all damages arising out of
any one occurrence is the liability and medical expenses limit shown
in the declarations. For example, if the insured business carries$500,000 liability and two persons, each claiming damages of
$500,000, bring a suit for the same incident, the limits remain at
$500,000. (The basic limit for Businessowners liability and medical
expenses is $300,000, which may be increased to either $500,000,
$1 million, or $2 million. Medical expenses coverage is limited to
$5,000 per person.)
Medical expense coverage is on a per-person basis even though it
is included in the overall liability limit. For example, if the insured
business carries a $500,000 limit of liability and $5,000 medical
expenses, and the business is responsible for negligently injuring five
persons, each person could incur up to $5,000 in medical expenses.
But if all file suit asking $500,000 in damages, the maximum that will
be paid for this occurrence is $500,000 total.
The sum of all damages arising out of any one personal and
advertising injury is likewise limited to the limit of liability indicated in
the declarations. This limit is separate, however, from the limit shown
in the declarations for damage caused by fire to premises rented to
the insured, or fire legal liability.
Aggregate Limits
The Businessowners liability coverage contains two aggregate
limits. One, as in the CGL form, applies to all injury or damage during
the policy period that falls within the products-completed operations
hazard. The other Businessowners aggregate limit applies to all other
injury or damage during the policy period, other than fire legal liability
losses. In the CGL form, the general aggregate limit applies to, and
is reduced by, fire legal liability losses.
The Businessowners aggregate limit that applies to products-
completed operations losses is equal to twice the liability and medical
expenses limit discussed previously. This marks a broadening ofcoverage from the previous forms, where the amount available for
products-completed operations losses was limited to the liability and
medical expenses limit. The aggregate limit that applies to all other
losses, including medical expenses, is also equal to twice the liability
and medical expense limit. It does not matter whether separate
claims are made for personal and advertising injury, for bodily injury,
and for property damage. Once the aggregate limit is exhausted, no
more claims will be paid during the policy period.
The Damage To Premises Rented To You limit is the largest
amount paid for property damage to premises rented to or
temporarily occupied by the insured with the owner’s permission, if
the damage arises out of fire or explosion.
Finally, the limits of insurance apply separately to each annual
term, but if policy is extended for a period of less than twelve months
that period is considered to be part of the previous term. For
example, an insured business carries liability limit of $500,000 and the
policy term is one year. But the businessowner asks for the policy to
be extended two months because he is closing the business at that
time. The liability limit of $500,000 will apply during the entire fourteen
months.
Liability and Medical Expenses Conditions
These conditions are similar to those found in other liability forms
including the CGL. The insured is reminded that information must be
obtained and forwarded to the insurer as soon as practicable so that
the insurer can investigate and mount a defense. Delay can result in
insufficient or loss of information—a key witness moves, for example,
and leaves no forwarding address. The insured can give an oral
notice to the insurer of an occurrence or offense that might result in a
claim but must give a written notice in event a suit or claim actuallyoccurs. Insureds who volunteer to pay any payments other than for
emergency first aid make those payments at their own expense.
Legal Action against Us
The insurer cannot be drawn into a suit against its own insured.
No legal action against the insurer can be taken unless all policy
terms have been complied with. The insurance applies separately to
each named insured and to each insured against whom suit is
brought, except with regard to the limits of insurance and the duties
specifically assigned to the first named insured.
Liability and Medical Expenses Definitions
Due to the coverage in the Businessowners form for personal and
advertising injury, and to the use of the Internet for advertising, the
definition was added to clarify coverage intent. For example, many
websites carry several advertisements for site sponsors. The only
advertisement to be considered as far as the policy goes, though, is
the one referencing the insured business.
Definition of Auto
The definition of “auto” includes trailers or semitrailers, as long as
these vehicles are designed for travel on public roads. The 2006 form
added “any other land vehicle” to the definition, if the vehicle is
subject to compulsory or financial responsibility laws or other motor
vehicle insurance or motor vehicle registration laws where it is
principally garaged or licensed. The rest of the definitions included in
the BOP are self-explanatory, but are necessary for form
interpretation nonetheless.
Insured ContractNo contract or agreement for indemnification for damage by fire to
premises the insured rents or temporarily occupies with permission of
the owner. Fire legal liability is not included in this definition because
separate limits are applicable to the coverage. An insured contract
does not encompass any construction or demolition within fifty feet of
a railroad because of the increased risk of working near a railroad.
Leased Worker
Because of the common practice of leasing workers for long-term
projects, and because the employer rather than the leasing company
controls the agreement between the employer and the leased worker,
the workers are considered employees.
Loading or Unloading
Similar to the CGL form, the Businessowners form does not apply
to loading or unloading property; this is properly covered under a
business auto policy. However, if an insured is loading property onto a
truck by means of a forklift, and the property falls off and injures
someone, the exception provides coverage.
Continuous or Repeated Exposure
Although bodily injury and property damage usually results
immediately upon contact with someone or something, the phrase
“continuous or repeated exposure” eliminates the necessity of proving
the exact moment at which the damage is sustained (although the
prior knowledge provisions do seek to limit the occurrence to events
happening during the policy period). The definition of “occurrence”
cannot be interpreted as limiting coverage to a single event. For
example, a forklift hitting an adjoining building’s wall once might not do
much damages, but if the forklift repeatedly hits the wall in the same
spot for a period of time, considerable damage might result. Suchdamage is included within the scope of the “continuous or repeated
exposure” wording.
Personal and Advertising Injury
This definition has been changed from the earlier BOP form. The
previous definitions distinguished “personal injury” and “advertising
injury”; in the current form the two are combined. In the current
edition, consequential bodily injury arising from personal and
advertising injury is encompassed in the definition. For example, an
insured businessowner may forcibly grab the arm of someone he
believes is shoplifting. If a suit results alleging bodily injury, this is
where coverage is found.
Products Completed Operations Hazard
Unlike the CGL form, the BOP does not provide coverage for
injury or property damage occurring on the premises of the insured
business if the business includes selling, handling, or distribution of
the insured’s product for consumption. The BOP may be used for
convenience stores and other eating establishments; this exception
allows coverage without the necessity of adding coverage by
endorsement.
Your Product
The definition of “your product” does not apply to real property.
The initial definition under the 1973 CGL policy did not address this
point and, as a result, some insurers used the injury-to-products
exclusion to deny coverage for losses to real property that would
have otherwise been covered by the broad form property damage
endorsement for completed operations. The current definition should
avoid that problem. Due to the similarity between the CGL form andthe Businessowners liability coverage, the definition has made its way
into the BOP.
Your product includes goods or products manufactured, sold,
handled, distributed, or disposed of by a “person or organization
whose business or assets you have acquired.” The definition of “your
product” includes the providing of or failure to provide warnings or
instructions. This wording clarifies that coverage for claims arising out
of the failure to provide adequate warnings or instructions concerning
a product should be handled under the products-completed
operations hazard.
Your Work
The definition of Your Work includes the phrase, “…the providing
of or the failure to provide warnings or instructions,” just like the “your
products” definition. Also, the phrase “work or operations
performed…on your behalf” complements the wording in exclusion m.
concerning the fact that the exclusion does not apply to work
performed on behalf of the named insured by a subcontractor; thus,
the named insured does have coverage for property damage to work
performed on his behalf by a subcontractor even though such work is
considered as the work of the named insured.
For some business owners, general liability is a many-headed
beast that is difficult to manage. Since the businessowners policy
offers the kinds of insurance that business owners need most
commonly in one prepackaged policy, the BOP can provide a
simplified approach for already overwhelmed business owners. Many
of the provisions, exclusions, and definitions are similar if not the
same between the two forms.
Endnote1.      For more information on the CGL endorsements see
Chapter 6: CGL Endorsements and Various Coverage Forms.Chapter 11
Issues in Commercial General
Liability Insurance
The Pollution Exclusion
The first pollution exclusion appeared in standardized forms in
1970, but a historical review should begin in 1966. Before 1966,
liability policies protected insureds against claims for bodily injury or
property damage caused by accident. Due to, among other things,
increasing demands for broadened coverage by insureds, as well as
court decisions holding that gradual pollution losses were covered as
accidents, the language of most liability policies was changed in 1966
from “caused by accident” to “caused by an occurrence.” Comments
from members of the insurance industry at that time indicated that the
occurrence language would exclude intentional or logically expected
harmful results from pollution.
In 1970, the Insurance Rating Board (a predecessor to Insurance
Services Office) issued two mandatory endorsements meant to
clarify the extent of noncoverage with regard to claims for pollution
damage; one endorsement was for business risks of every sort
(except professional) and the other was for oil risks. The general
business risk exclusionary endorsement (which was later
incorporated into the printed provisions of most commercial liability
forms in 1973) read as follows: “This insurance does not apply … to
bodily injury or property damage arising out of the discharge,
dispersal, release or escape of smoke, vapors, soot, fumes, acids,alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste materials or other
irritants, contaminants or pollutants into or upon land, the atmosphere
or any watercourse or body of water; but this exclusion does not
apply if such discharge, dispersal, release or escape is sudden and
accidental.”
Most of the resultant litigation concerning the scope of the
pollution exclusion centered on the meaning of “sudden and
accidental” in the exception to the exclusion, and particularly on the
meaning that should be accorded to “sudden.” Two major
interpretations of the phrase emerged.
One view is that sudden and accidental is a restatement within the
pollution exclusion of the definition of occurrence, so that the only
types of pollution losses that are excluded are those that are
expected or intended by the insured; that is, both abrupt and gradual
pollution damage is covered so long as the pollution was unintended
and unexpected. Another view has given sudden a temporal meaning,
so that coverage applies only if the polluting event is both accidental
and abrupt, that is, happening quickly and not gradually. Despite the
fact that this sudden and accidental language is over twenty-five
years old and despite the fact that current CGL forms have dropped
that phrase from the pollution exclusion, the issue of coverage (or
noncoverage) under the sudden and accidental exception to the
pollution exclusion is still at issue around the country.
Some examples of cases where the sudden and accidental clause
is given a temporal status are: Dimmit Chevrolet, Inc. v.
Southeastern Fidelity Insurance Corp., 636 So. 2d 700 (Fla. 1994);
Board of Regents of the University of Minnesota v. Royal Insurance
Company, 517 N.W.2d 888 (Minn. 1994); and, Bedford Affiliates v.
Harvey Manheimer, 205 F.3d 1321 (2nd Cir. 2000). The Dimmit case
is interesting in that it represents a reversal of opinion from the
sudden and accidental phrase causing the pollution exclusion to be
ambiguous (thus rendering the pollution exclusion not applicable) tothe opinion that the term has a temporal aspect with a sense of
immediacy or abruptness (with the result that the pollution exclusion is
applicable). The justice on the Florida supreme court who changed
his mind about the meaning of sudden and accidental, thereby
supplying the majority opinion that sudden has a temporal aspect,
stated that “Try as I will, I cannot wrench the words sudden and
accidental to mean gradual and accidental.” This case represents a
very solid discussion of the issue and lists case law on both sides of
the question.
Some examples of cases where the sudden and accidental clause
is viewed as a restatement of the occurrence requirement, thus
causing the pollution exclusion to fall victim to the ambiguity trap, are:
Greenville County v. South Carolina Insurance Reserve Fund, 443
S.E.2d 552 (S.C. 1994); Patz v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance
Company, 15 F.3d 699 (7th Cir. 1994); and Textron Inc. v. Aetna
Casualty & Surety Company, 754 A.2d 742 (R.I. 2000). The
Greenville case is a decision by the South Carolina supreme court
that deserves attention in that it takes note of the split of authority as
to the proper definition of sudden and accidental that exists in this
country and lays a solid foundation for interpreting the clause as an
ambiguous term that is, according to the court, “susceptible of more
than one reasonable interpretation.” The Rhode Island case echoes
this finding.
The sudden and accidental phrase was dropped from the pollution
exclusion, and, in 1986, the Insurance Services Office (ISO) issued
Commercial General Liability (CGL) coverage forms with a nearly
absolute pollution exclusion. The wording of this exclusion has
remained mainly the same throughout the subsequent revisions of the
CGL forms, although the current version of the CGL form (CG 00 01
04 13) does list several exceptions to the exclusion in an attempt to
clarify under what particular circumstances the exclusion is
applicable.In general, the post-1973 pollution exclusionary language has
been upheld by the courts. The following cases are examples of
current judicial interpretations.
The pollution exclusion in the general liability insurance policy
barred coverage of clean-up costs caused by the flow of fuel oil from
ruptured storage tank pipes. This was the decision by the U.S. district
court in Guilford Industries, Inc., v. Liberty Mutual Insurance
Company, 688 F. Supp. 792 (D. Me. 1988). In that case, a flood
ruptured the piping for oil tanks at the insured plaintiff’s mill and oil
flowed downstream causing property damage. The state of Maine
told Guilford Industries that it would be held responsible for clean-up
of the oil as well as for any damage claims. When the insurer
defendant denied coverage for the damage, Guilford sought a
declaratory judgment that the property damage caused by the oil was
covered under its insurance policies with Liberty Mutual. The district
court said in its ruling that the pollution exclusion is “clear and
unambiguous; an examination of the policy establishes lack of
coverage”.
In a New York case, the Suffolk County Supreme Court decided
that the clear and unambiguous pollution exclusion from liability
insurance coverage of property damage arising out of release or
discharge of pollutants barred coverage of pollution damage. The
court, in discussing the issues, stated that “any exclusions…m ust be
couched in language that is clear, specific, and unmistakable” and
that “if the insurer can establish, as a matter of law, that the damage
or injury complained of is unambiguously excepted from coverage,
summary judgment in favor of the insurer is proper”. And, that is
exactly how the court viewed the pollution exclusion in Budofsky v.
The Hartford Insurance Company, 556 N.Y.S.2d 438 (N.Y. Sup. Ct.
1990).
A Minnesota court of appeals found that alleged injuries resulting
from the build-up and release of toxic gases were excluded fromcoverage under a general liability policy and that the pollution
exclusion was not vague or ambiguous. The case is League of
Minnesota Cities Insurance Trust v. City of Coon Rapids, 446
N.W.2d 419 (Minn. Ct. App. 1989). Here, some individuals suffered
lung injuries from the release of nitrogen dioxide in a city ice arena;
they promptly sued the city, which then sought coverage under its
liability policy. The trial court granted the insurer’s motion for
summary judgment based on the pollution exclusion and the court of
appeals upheld the reasoning and the decision of the trial court.
Some other cases that have upheld the CGL forms’ pollution
exclusion (or an exclusion similar in language, put out by particular
insurance companies) are: Western World Insurance Company v.
Stack Oil, Inc., 922 F.2d 118 (2d Cir. 1990), interpreting Connecticut
law; A.J. Gregory v. Tennessee Gas Company, 948 F.2d 203 (5th
Cir. 1991); Hydro Systems, Inc. v. Continental Insurance Company,
929 F.2d 472 (9th Cir. 1991); Central Illinois Public Service
Company v. Allianz Underwriters Insurance Company, 608 N.E.2d
155 (Ill. App. Ct. 1992); U.S. Bronze Powders, Inc. v. Commerce &
Industry Company, 611 A.2d 667 (N.J. Super. Ct. 1992); Modell &
Company v. General Insurance Company of Trieste, 597 N.Y.S.2d
75 (N.Y. App. Div. 1993); and, Casualty Indemnity Exchange v. City
of Sparta, 997 S.W.2d 545 (Mo. Ct. App. 1999) in which a court of
appeals declared that “this court must enforce the absolute pollution
exclusion as written, not rewrite it.”
Of course, even though the court cases cited above represent the
majority opinion today, there are bound to be dissenting voices.
Consider the case of Family Service of Rochester, Inc. v. National
Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA., 562 N.Y.S.2d 358
(N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1990). In this case, the insured delivered fuel oil to a
customer’s home over a period of months and the oil leaked from the
customer’s fuel tank onto neighboring lands. The neighbors filed suit
and claimed that Family Service knew or should have known thatinordinate amounts of fuel oil were being delivered, indicating
leakage, and so Family Service was negligent in its duties. Family
Service sought coverage from National Union Fire which denied
coverage and so, this action was brought to clarify the insurer’s
obligation to defend and indemnify Family Service. The New York
supreme court of Monroe County decided that “the allegations of
the…complaint do not fall within any of the enumerated paragraphs of
the pollution exclusion and thus cannot properly be excluded from
coverage on these grounds”; therefore, the insurer’s motion to
dismiss the complaint was denied.
And, in the case of North American Specialty Insurance Company
v. Georgia Gulf Corporation, 99 F. Supp. 2d 726 (M.D. La. 2000) the
U.S. district court said that the exclusion was ambiguous because
“the exclusion failed to specify whether it applies only to discharges
caused by the policyholder or also to discharges caused by third
persons.” This ambiguity was construed in favor of coverage for the
insured.
The point to be emphasized by the cases cited above, is that
courts today will look at the complaint and the facts of the case,
measure them against every applicable sentence in the pollution
exclusion, and judge accordingly. In the Family Service case, for
example, the facts and the bases of liability were found not to match
any sections of the pollution exclusion and that situation could
certainly repeat itself in court decisions yet to be reported. However,
as noted previously, most courts today are upholding the absolute
pollution exclusion of the post-1973 general liability policies; the
majority of courts that have reviewed the nearly identical language of
the various absolute pollution exclusions have ruled them
unambiguous and, thus, enforceable under the law of contracts.
This being said, some courts today are also attempting to carve
out exceptions wherein the pollution exclusion is not applicable. Themain areas of focus for these courts are the meaning of “pollutant”
and the environmental intent of the exclusion.
The pollution exclusion does define the word “pollutant”. And,
based on this definition, some courts are inquiring as to whether the
substance in question fits the definition, whether the substance is in
fact a pollutant and thus, is a proper subject for the exclusion. As the
district court said in the Guilford case mentioned above, “almost any
substance might fall within the exclusion, but it can only do so in
certain very precisely drawn circumstances.”
In Re Hub Recycling, Inc., 106 BR 372 (D. N.J. 1989) was a
case where the insurer sought a summary judgment against Hub
Recycling, contending that the insurance policy purchased by Hub
precluded coverage for the costs of clean up of land used by Hub in
its recycling business. The U.S. district court (New Jersey) said that
“in the context of a pollution exclusion clause in liability insurance, the
mere presence of recyclable materials could not preclude coverage
of land clean up without further proof that the materials were also
irritants or contaminants. Inasmuch as there is a genuine issue of
material fact as to the nature of the recyclable materials, the insurer
is not entitled to summary judgment”. The court rejected the insurer’s
contention that all recyclables are waste and are, therefore, part of
the pollution exclusion clause; the court decided that the term “waste”
raises ambiguities and, of course, ambiguities are resolved against
the insurer. The insurer had to prove that the waste in question was
either an irritant or contaminant in order for the exclusion to apply.
On the other hand, an appeals court in Missouri had no trouble
describing kitchen waste as a pollutant. The court said that the
definition of pollutant on the liability policy specifically included waste
and the dictionary defined waste as garbage, rubbish, excrement, or
sewage. The substance from the kitchen in this case met that
description and so, the pollution exclusion applied. The case isBoulevard Investment Company v. Capitol Indemnity Corporation, 27
S.W.3d 856 (Mo. App. Ct. 2000).
Titan Holdings Syndicate, Inc. v. City of Keene, 898 F.2d 265 (1st
Cir. 1990) is another case in which the meaning of pollutants is
addressed by the court. In this case, the insured city brought an
action for declaratory judgment, seeking coverage for claims for
bodily injury and property damage based on, among other things,
loud and disturbing noises and unduly bright night lighting emanating
from the city’s sewage treatment plant after the insurer had declined
coverage, based on the pollution exclusion. The U.S. court of appeals
for New Hampshire stated that “what is at issue is whether the
excessive light and noise are pollutants within the meaning of the
policy … While we agree that excessive light and noise possibly could
be considered pollutants … according to the policies, a pollutant is
any solid, liquid, gaseous, or thermal irritant or contaminant …
Excessive noise and light may be irritants, but they are not solid,
liquid, gaseous, or thermal irritants.” The court of appeals found that
since the irritants did not fit the exact definition in the pollution
exclusion, coverage was not excluded and the city of Keene was
entitled to a defense from the insurer.
Some insureds’ operations involve some aspect of controlled
discharge or dispersal of toxic elements—paint contractors,
exterminators, weed control contractors, etc. In a case dealing with
this type of issue, a federal district court in Kansas held that a mixture
of malathion and diesel fuel, used by a city to control mosquitoes,
was not a pollutant. The court ruled that the term “pollutants” meant
“a substance that is particularly harmful or toxic to persons or the
environment generally, and not merely those substances harmful to
particular persons or property due to special circumstances.” Since
malathion was approved by the EPA for mosquito control and its
mixture with diesel fuel was standard usage, this pesticide was not a
pollutant because it did not normally harm humans. The case isWestchester Fire Insurance Co. v. City of Pittsburg, Kansas, 791 F.
Supp. 836 (D. Kan. 1992).
In a case involving the post-1986 pollution provision, Atlantic
Mutual Insurance Co. v. McFadden, 595 N.E.2d 762 (Sup. Jud. Ct.
Mass. 1992), the Massachusetts court held that lead in paint, putty,
or plaster is not a pollutant for purposes of the exclusion. The
insured, a landlord, had been sued for bodily injury due to lead
poisoning of two children who lived with their mother on the rented
premises.
In Regional Bank of Colorado v. St. Paul Fire & Marine, 35 F.3d
494 (10th Cir. 1994), a U.S. court of appeals stated that “an ordinary
policyholder would not reasonably characterize carbon monoxide
emitted from a residential heater as pollution”.
In Incorporated Village of Cedarhurst v. Hanover Insurance
Company, 636 N.Y.S.2d 390 (N.Y. App. Div. 1996), a New York
appeals court held that sewage was not a pollutant.
Other courts see other substances differently. In Texas, a Federal
court held that cleaning solvent is a pollutant and so, the exclusion
applied; the case is Amoco Production Company v. Hydroblast
Corporation, 90 F. Supp. 2d 727 (N.D. Tex. 1999). And see, Kim v.
State Farm Fire & Casualty Company, 728 N.E.2d 530 (Ill. App.
2000) wherein an appeals court declared that the pollution exclusion
applied because perchlorethane was a contaminant that had been
released.
These cases indicate that, while the current pollution exclusion
may generally be upheld, courts are looking into the definition of
pollutants and applying their own distinctive interpretations on a case
by case basis. This means that just because the facts of a claim may
fit within the terms of, and thus, make the claim subject to, thepollution exclusion, the exclusion may still be avoided if the substance
that was spilled or released does not match the individual court’s
definition of a pollutant.
Similarly, some courts seek to limit the scope of the pollution
exclusion to environmental claims only.
In Gamble Farm Inn v. Selective Insurance Company, 656 A.2d
142 (Pa. Super. 1995), an appeals court in Pennsylvania, in granting
coverage despite the insurer’s denial based on the pollution exclusion,
stated that the pollution exclusion is directed at claims involving
pollution of the natural environment. This case offers a good
discussion of the pollution exclusion as an anti-environmental
contamination exclusion only.
Another case of interest is Meridian Mutual Insurance Company
v. Kellman, 197 F.3d 1178 (6th Cir. 1999). Here, a Federal appeals
court interpreting Michigan law, declared that the pollution exclusion
does not shield an insurer from liability for injuries caused by toxic
substances that are still confined within the area of the intended use.
This court listed many cases on both sides of the question as to
whether a total pollution exclusion barred coverage for all injuries
caused by contaminants, or applied only to injuries caused by
traditional environmental pollution. This battery of conflicting judicial
opinions helped the appeals court find coverage in the dispute.
Essex Insurance Company v. Avondale Mills, Inc., 639 So. 2d
1339 (Ala. 1994), Continental Casualty Company v. Rapid-American
Corp., 609 N.E.2d 506 (Ct. App. N.Y. 1993), the McFadden and the
Westchester decisions mentioned above, all make the case that the
pollution exclusion was created to exclude only environmental pollution
damage. So, unless the claim deals with environmental damage, the
particular courts that decided these cases (and those that would
follow their lead) would not apply the pollution exclusion.On the other hand, there is American States Insurance Company
v. Technical Surfacing, Inc., 50 F. Supp. 2d 888 (D. Minn. 1999). In
this case, the Federal court rejected an insured’s contention that the
pollution exclusion did not apply to pollution inside a building. The
court said that “no geographical limits on the location of the pollution”
were in the exclusion’s language, and so, the exclusion applied.
Echoing this sentiment, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in Madison
Construction Company v. Harleysville Mutual Insurance Company,
735 A.2d 100 (Pa. 1999), said that no language in the pollution
exclusion limits its application—implicitly or explicitly—to instances in
which the pollutant has escaped into the environment. This was a
situation where a worker was injured due to fumes emanating from a
compound used by the insured. The trial court had decided that any
discharge or release or escape of pollutants must be into the
environment in order to trigger the exclusion, but the state Supreme
Court disagreed and reversed the lower court’s decision.
There are other items in the current pollution exclusion area that
should be mentioned here.
An area of pollution liability exposure that is not absolutely
excluded pertains to bodily injury or property damage arising out of
the insured’s products and completed operations. For example, say
that containers are the product of the named insured and have been
purchased by a business on whose premises the containers are used
the store hazardous chemicals. If the containers leak because of
some manufacturing defect, causing a toxic spill, and the business
sues the named insured for damage to its property, the named
insured should be covered under its CGL form.
The current pollution exclusion also has some exceptions worth
noting. Bodily injury if sustained within a building and caused by
smoke, fumes, vapor, or soot from equipment used to heat, cool, or
dehumidify that building is not excluded. This means that if, for
example, carbon monoxide fumes seep from a furnace and injurecustomers or visitors in the insured’s building, and the injured parties
file lawsuits against the insured, the pollution exclusion will not prevent
coverage for the insured. Another exception is for BI or PD arising out
of heat, fumes, or smoke from a hostile fire. As an example, if the
insured’s building caught on fire and smoke billowing from the building
caused damage to a neighbor’s building or injury to someone working
in that other building, the insured’s CGL form would apply to a
subsequent PD or BI claim.
Another exception is for BI or PD for which the insured may be
held liable if he is a contractor and the owner of the site or location
where the insured/contractor is performing operations is added to the
insured’s CGL form as an additional insured with respect to the
insured’s ongoing operations.
BI and PD arising out of heat, smoke, or fumes from a hostile fire
are also exceptions to the pollution exclusion. As an example, if the
insured’s building caught on fire and smoke billowing from the building
caused damage to a neighbor’s building or injury to someone working
in that other building, the insured’s CGL form would apply to a
subsequent BI or PD claim.
The current pollution exclusion also has an express exception in it
for bodily injury or property damage arising out of the escape of fuels
or lubricants needed for the normal mechanical functions of mobile
equipment. This exception is limited to certain circumstances such as
not applying if the fuels or lubricants are intentionally released or
discharged and not applying to a cleanup order from the Federal,
state, or local government.
The cleanup costs part of the current pollution exclusion deserves
some mention.Note that the exclusion applies to any statutory or regulatory
requirement that the insured clean up pollutants, as well as any
request, demand, or order. The point here is that even if no one
makes a demand or orders the insured to clean up a pollution spill,
and the insured does it anyway just because there is a law on the
books that the insured is required to clean up the spill, the CGL form
will not pay those costs.
The cleanup costs exclusion does not apply to liability for
damages because of PD that the insured would have in the absence
of any request or demand or order. Sometimes, there is a thin line
between paying for property damage for which the insured is liable
and cleanup costs. But, if the insured is liable for the PD, and other
parts of the pollution exclusion do not prevent coverage, the insured
will have coverage for the PD liability and the insurer will not use the
cleanup costs section of the pollution exclusion to deny any payments
for fixing the property damage.
Another item of interest is that the current CGL forms include a
pollution exclusion under the personal and advertising injury liability
part (coverage B) of the forms. This was in response to some courts
deciding that a claim for personal injury (as defined on the CGL
forms) based on the release or dispersal of pollution was covered by
the CGL form since there was no pollution exclusion applying to
coverage B.
Care, Custody, or Control Exclusion
In the 1973 edition of the comprehensive general liability policy,
exclusion (k) (3) referred to property damage to property owned or
occupied by or rented to the insured, property used by the insured, or
property in the care, custody, or control of the insured or as to which
the insured is for any purpose exercising physical control. It should be
noted that this exclusion makes no distinction between real propertyand personal property, since it just uses the general term “property”
in describing its scope.
The 1986 commercial general liability (CGL) form reworded the
exclusion. Exclusion (j) (4) on that form referred to property damage
to “personal property in your care, custody, or control”, thus
distinguishing between real and personal property. It also makes use
of the term “your”, thereby limiting application of (j) (4) to the named
insured only, since the policy states that the words “you” and “your”
refer to the named insured.
The current version of the exclusion on the CGL form (CG 00 01
04 13) closely parallels the 1986 version, except that in the 1990 and
later versions of the form, the care, custody, or control part of the
exclusion now talks about personal property in the care, custody, or
control of the insured instead of in “your” (the named insured’s)
control.
The majority of cases support the view that property in the care,
custody, or control of the insured refers to possessory handling
(actual possession or direct physical control) of the property as
distinguished from proprietary control (simply having the legal right to
control or the legal title to the property). Generally speaking, physical
control of another’s property is necessary for there to be care,
custody, or control. Accordingly, property stored on an insured’s
premises is generally held to be in the care, custody, and control of
the insured. As an example, in Country Mutual v. Waldman
Mercantile Company, 103 Ill. App.3d 39 (1981), the Appellate Court
of Illinois, Fifth District ruled that the care, custody or control
exclusion applied in a situation where a third party stored
merchandise in a building owned by the insured. A fire destroyed the
merchandise and in the ensuing dispute over insurance coverage, the
court noted that the employees of the insured were on duty at the
time the fire began, the insured was primarily responsible for
protecting merchandise while on its premises, and only employees ofthe insured had keys to premises and had access to the merchandise
at all times. Thus, the insured had exclusive possessory control of the
property at the time of the loss and so, the care, custody or control
exclusion applied.
In contrast, it thus makes sense that if the insured leases locked
storage space to a third party and only the third party (not the
insured) has a key to and can access the storage space at-will, the
insured does not have care, custody, and control over the third
party’s property stored within the space.
Some courts hold that control exercised by the insured must be
exclusive in order to establish possessory control. For instance, in
Eisenbarth v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 840 P.2d 945 (1992), when an
insured sought to recover damages arising from the death of cattle
which were pastured in his corn fields, the Supreme Court of
Wyoming found that in order for the care, custody or control exclusion
in the insured’s ranch policy to apply, total care, custody or control of
the damaged property by the insured was necessary. The fact that
the cattle were on land owned by the insured and were within his
fences did not in and of itself mean that they were within his “care,
custody or control” as those terms were used in the ranch
comprehensive liability policy, and whether the insured had total care,
custody or control of damaged property within the meaning of the
policy exclusion was a question for the jury.
Shankle v. VIP Lounge, Inc., 468 So. 2d 548 (Fla. App. 5 Dist.,
1985), is a case dealing with the “exercising physical control”
provision found on the 1973 general liability policy. In this case, the
court held that the exclusion did not bar coverage for property
damage to musical instruments routinely left in the insured’s lounge
overnight by performers. This was so because the owner of the
lounge could not and did not exercise care, custody, or control over
the instruments. Simply leaving the instruments in the premises
overnight did not establish physical control over them by the insured.The court also added that whether the exclusion applied was a
factual question and its resolution depended on many circumstances,
including the nature of the property, its location, and what the insured
was doing with or to it.
An alternate viewpoint can be found in Mead v. Travelers
Insurance Company, 274 A.2d 792 (1971). Here, the New Hampshire
Supreme Court considered the application of a policy exclusion for
property in the care, custody, or control of the insured to a situation in
which the insured was operating a crane. While an oil tank was being
moved by the crane, the crane cable broke, causing the oil tank to fall
and sustain damage. The insurance company argued that because
the crane was being operated by the insured, the insured had care,
custody, or control of the oil tank when it was damaged. The court
noted that the insured was acting under the direction of the oil tank
owner and that the crane and the insured as its operator were no
more than instrumentalities of the oil tank owner; therefore, the
exclusion did not apply. Thus it would seem that, even if possessory
control is the key in most legal decisions on the exclusion, the actual
meaning of possessory control can still be subject to judicial
interpretation.
The Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, does offer some
guidelines in this area. In Liberty Mutual Insurance Company v.
Zurich Insurance Company, 930 N.E.2d 573 (2010), the court
employed a two-part test for the applicability of the care, custody or
control exclusion. If the property damaged is within the possessory
control of the insured at the time of the loss and is a necessary
element of the work performed, the property is considered to be in
the care, custody or control of the insured.
Although the care, custody or control exclusion generally requires
that control exercised by the insured be exclusive, that control need
not be continuous, and courts will apply the exclusion so long as the
insured has possessory control at the time the property is damaged;see the Country Mut. Ins. Co. case noted previously. Further,
exclusivity of possession may exist even if the possession is of short
duration, and intimate handling of the third party’s property is not a
prerequisite to establishing possessory control; see Stewart Warner
Corp. v. Burns Intern. Sec. Services, Inc., 527 F.2d 1025 (1975).
Lastly, exclusivity of possession does not require direct physical
contact with the property, as passive duties such as guarding give the
insured care, custody, or control of the property; see the Liberty Mut.
Ins. Co. case noted previously.
Similar reasoning to that of the Stewart Warner and Country
Mutual courts was employed in Essex Ins. Co. v. Soy City Sock Co.,
503 F.Supp.2d 1068 (C.D.Ill., 2007). The Essex court found that the
care, custody or control exclusion precluded coverage for third-party
materials destroyed by a fire in an insured’s warehouse where the
insured took exclusive possession of the materials and the materials
were stored for processing, packed, and shipped by his employees,
such that they were a necessary part of the work insured performed.
The court explained that although the exclusion required that control
exercised by the insured be exclusive, control could exist even if the
possession was of short duration. Further, determination of whether
an insured has exclusive possessory control involved multiple factors;
among those factors were who supervised the operation in which the
property was damaged, who had control of the property at the time
of the damage, and who exercised the right of access to maintain,
move, or protect the property.
A contractor is generally regarded as having care, custody or
control over the property upon which he is working, and that extends
even to situations where the contractor subcontracts the work out to
others.
It has been held that a general contractor has custody or control
of property at the site of the operation. This was the decision in L.L.Jarrell Construction Co. v. Columbia Casualty Co., 130 F. Supp. 436
(1955), a case in which the exclusion was held to apply to damage
done by the insured, a general contractor, to property on the project
erected by a subcontractor. The court stressed that the contract gave
the contractor control of the work. Similarly, in Emile M. Babst
Company, Inc. v. Nichols Construction Corp., 488 So. 2d 699
(1986), when a cherry picker fell from a dock that was under
construction, damaging the dock and the cherry picker, the general
contractor was held to be in control even though the subcontractor
was operating the cherry picker. The Court of Appeal of Louisiana
held that the care, custody, or control exclusion did not release the
insurer of liability because the dock was under the control and
supervision of the general contractor and not the insured
subcontractor.
In McCord, Condron & McDonald, Inc. v. Twin City Fire Ins. Co.,
607 S.W.2d 956 (Tex. Civ. App. Fort Worth, 1980), a steel contractor
sought recovery for damage to a school building that occurred when
tees and beams set by the contractor fell down. The court held that
policy exclusions for property in the care, custody, or control of the
insured barred coverage where there was no evidence that the
contractor had turned the partially completed building over to the
school district. This decision was notwithstanding the contention by
the insured that the school district had paid for most of the damaged
property and therefore owned it.
More recent cases, however, have modified this holding to the
extent that the contractor’s control is seen as limited to that particular
object or area which he or she totally and physically manipulates. For
example, in Hartford Casualty Company v. Cruse, 938 F.2d 601
(1991), the United States Court of Appeals in Texas decided a
dispute where a contractor who performed foundation leveling
services caused damage to an entire house through defective work.
The court stated that the care, custody, or control exclusion did not
apply to the entire home, other than the foundation itself, since thecontractor worked only on the foundation and the owners of the home
never gave up the control of the entire house to the contractor.
Also, in Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Fulkerson, 571 N.E.2d 256
(Ill.App. 5 Dist., 1991), the court stated that, standing alone, the
mere performance of work by an oil well service contractor within a
well bore did not establish as a matter of law that the contractor had
care, custody, or control of the well itself. The court declared that the
evidence confirmed that the contractor had exclusive physical control
over the item being placed in the well, but not over the well itself, so
the care, custody, or control exclusion could not be said to apply to
damage to the oil well.
See also Crane Service & Equipment Corp. v. United States
Fidelity & Guaranty Company, 496 N.E.2d 833 (1986). In this case,
the Appeals Court of Massachusetts handled a situation where a
crane owner, whose crane was damaged while rented to a general
contractor, brought an action against the contractor’s insurer to
satisfy a judgment obtained against the contractor. Crane supplied a
hydraulic truck crane to the insured, J.L. Caputo Construction
Company. Crane also furnished an oiler, who drove the crane, and an
operator, who operated the levers to make lifts. The operator and
oiler retained physical control over the crane at all times and at the
end of the day, they secured the crane and held onto the keys. When
the crane was damaged while in use, Crane sought reimbursement
from Caputo in accordance with the rental agreement. Caputo’s
insurer denied coverage, citing the care, custody or control exclusion.
The court said that the dispositive factors of possession and control
lined up decisively in favor of disallowing the exclusion to apply. The
crane’s owner’s employees drove, operated, fueled, maintained, and
repaired the crane and they, not the insured, had possession and
control of the property.
Under the current CGL forms, of course, the exclusion might be
easier for the courts to interpret should contractors cause damagewhile working on a project. The care, custody, or control part of the
exclusion is limited to personal property and another part of the
exclusion deals with “that particular part of real property” on which
the named insured or any contractor or subcontractor is performing
operations.
This can be seen in Grefer v. Travelers Ins. Co., 919 So. 2d 758
(2005), a case in which an oil pipe cleaning contractor’s CGL policy
exclusions for property the contractor owned, rented, or occupied
operated to deny coverage for environmental damages which the
contractor’s pipe cleaning operations did to property that the
contractor had leased. The court determined that the property
damage was on the property rented, occupied or used by the
contractor, or to property in the care, custody, or control of the
contractor; that the property damage occurred to that particular part
of real property on which the contractor was performing its
operations, and the damage clearly arose out of those operations.
Contractual considerations are often important when analyzing
care, custody or control situations. For instance, in Herbison v.
Employers Insurance Co. of Alabama, 593 S.W.2d 923 (Tenn.App.,
1979), a painting contractor sought to recover from his liability insurer
the cost of sprinkler heads that the contractor had damaged while
spray painting a customer’s ceiling. The court held that the exclusion
applied to the loss because the contractor had a contractual duty to
exercise a degree of control over the sprinkler heads and in fact
exercised physical control over them when he wrapped them in
aluminum foil while attempting to protect them from damage.
In County of Westchester v. Edo Corp., 504 NYS2d 63 (1986),
the court determined that the care, custody, or control exclusion of
the insured’s umbrella liability policies applied where the insured
leased an airport hangar that was damaged by fire. The court
explained that, under the lease, the insured had contracted to carefor and take control over the building, thus the exclusion precluded
coverage.
Although it might seem that property on which the insured is
actually working at the time of an accident would be under his or her
control and, consequently, there would be no coverage for damage to
it, some courts have held otherwise.
In McLouth Steel Corp. v. Mesta Machine Co.,116 F. Supp. 689
(1953), the court held that a liability policy should cover damage to a
machine being hoisted by the insured, a subcontractor, because the
contract gave the prime contractor control over the machine, even
though the insured did the actual hoisting. In Boswell v. Travelers
Indemnity Co., 120 A.2d 250 (1955), the insured, who had a contract
to renovate and replace some parts of heating units in a building,
negligently damaged one unit when testing the work after completion.
The court held for coverage, on the ground that the heating unit was
part of the building and consequently was not in the insured’s control
even though the insured was still working on it. Also as an example
see Mead, previously discussed.
Many felt that the addition of the phrase “exercising physical
control” to the exclusion would remove coverage in a lot of cases of
damage to property being worked on by the insured. However, in
Elcar Mobile Homes v. Baxter 169 A.2d 509 (1961), a New Jersey
court held otherwise. The insured was sued for damage to a trailer of
a customer that the insured was sandblasting at the customer’s
premises, and the court applied Boswell, holding that the “exercising
physical control” feature did not change the effect of the exclusion.
Perhaps in reaction to the reasoning of Elcar and cases like it,
further revision of the exclusion occurred, with the 1986 version and
the current version of the CGL forms dropping the “exercising
physical control” phrase for the exclusion of property damage to thatparticular part of real property on which the insured is performing
operations. The CGL forms now strive to clarify that damage to real
property while being worked on by the insured is excluded.
In determining the scope of the care, custody, or control
exclusion, some courts have distinguished two situations: where
damaged property is merely incidental to the property being worked
on, and where damaged property is a necessary element of the work
involved.
In International Derrick & Equipment Co. v. Buxbaum, 240 F.2d
536 (1957), the court determined that the insured’s liability policy,
which was written prior to 1955, should not apply to a claim for
damage to a radio mast. The insured had been working for a
manufacturer under a contract when the manufacturer called for the
insured to erect a radio mast for a third party. The insured complied
and subsequently the mast fell and was damaged. In denying
applicability of the policy based on the care, custody, or control
exclusion, the court explained that the exclusion was not applicable if
the damaged property was merely incidental to the property being
worked on. Rather, it applied where the property was under the
insured’s supervision and was a necessary element of the work
involved.
In Ronalco, Inc. v. Home Insurance Company, 606 S.W.2d 160
(1980), the insured had agreed to remove and replace the refractory
lining inside a furnace at a customer’s premises. While the work was
being done, a dynamite charge misfired, damaging the outer wall of
the furnace. The contractor’s insurer denied coverage because of the
care, custody, or control exclusion on a policy written after 1955. The
Supreme Court of Kentucky, noting that the terms of the insured’s
agreement with the owner and union regulations prevented the
insured from working on any portion of the furnace other than the
inner lining, held that because the property damaged was merely
incidental to the property being worked on, the exclusion did notapply. It should be noted that the court determined that no bailment
existed between the insured and the owner of the furnace but, had a
bailment existed, the exclusion would have been applicable.
Similarly, the U.S. Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit, held in Boston
Old Colony Ins. Co. v. Tiner Associates Inc., 288 F.3d 222 (2002),
that under Louisiana law, the provision of a transmission tower repair
contractor’s excess liability policy excluding damage to property in the
care, custody, or control of the insured did not apply to preclude a
television station’s insurer from recovering for collapse of the station’s
transmission tower, which occurred while the contractor was repairing
the tower. The court reasoned that the tower was only incidental to
specific sections on which repairs were made.
Also noting the difference between merely incidental property
damage and damage to property that is a necessary element of the
work involved was Ceramic Tiles of Fairfield, Inc. v. Aetna Casualty
and Surety Company, 466 A.2d 348 (1983). Here, ceramic tiles
installed by the insured were damaged when the insured used an acid
solution to clean the tiles. The court felt that in this situation the floor
and tiles were under the supervision of the insured. After explaining
the two situations that could exist, the court held that the property
damage was a necessary element of the worked involved, and the
exclusion should apply to preclude the insured from recovering under
the liability policy.
In Holter v. National Union Fire Ins. Co., 459 P.2d 61 (1969), the
Washington Court of Appeals held that because “employee” was not
included within the definition of the term “insured” under a CGL policy,
the exclusionary clause of damage to property in the insured’s care,
custody, or control was not applicable when a boat elevator the
insured’s employee was operating fell from its track and into water.Though the policy definition of insured did not include “employees”
specifically, the insurer argued that the exclusion was still applicable
because acts of employees are considered acts of the employer
under the master-servant rule. In rejecting the argument, the court
held that the master-servant rule did not broaden the scope of
“insured” in the care, custody, or control exclusion. The court said that
had the insurer intended to exclude such losses it could have made
explicit reference to employees and worded the exclusion: “this policy
does not apply… to injury or destruction of property in the care,
custody or control of the insured or any of his employees, or
property as to which the insured or any of his employees for any
purpose is exercising physical control.” Since no reference was made
to employees, however, the exclusion was inapplicable to this loss.
This same reasoning was used by a Washington court in Phil
Schroeder, Inc. v. Royal Globe Insurance Company, 683 P.2d 186
(1984). The court stated that the definition of insured under the policy
did not include employees, thus the care, custody, or control
exclusion on the policy did not apply to damage to a carpet as a
result of the malfunctioning of a cleaning machine being operated by
an employee of the insured.
Based on the wording of the care, custody, or control exclusion in
the 1986 CGL forms, the Holter case and the Schroeder case were
logical conclusions, as the basis of these decisions was an employee
not being included within the definition of the term “insured” with
reference to the exclusion. Under the 1986 CGL forms, an employee
is included as an insured for acts within the scope of employment.
However, the care, custody, or control exclusion on the 1986 CGL
forms states that the insurance does not apply to property damage to
personal property in “your” care, custody, or control, and “your” is a
defined term in the CGL forms referring to the named insured shown
in the declarations and not to all insureds. Therefore, employees,
although insureds for the most part, are not named insureds and thewording of the exclusion could be interpreted as not applying to
employees.
As mentioned earlier, the wording of the exclusion in the CGL
forms now states that the insurance does not apply to property
damage to personal property in the care, custody, or control of the
insured. Of course, this still has no effect on the fact that the
employee has no coverage for the property damage, because under
the who is an insured section of the CGL form an employee is not an
insured for property damage to property “in the care, custody or
control of, or over which physical control is being exercised for any
purpose by” the named insured or any employee. The employee is
not an insured at all for a loss that involves property damage to
property in his care, custody, or control, and, since he is not an
insured, he has no coverage under the employer’s CGL form. Thus,
the applicability of an exclusion is not relevant.
A question remains as to whether the care, custody, or control
exclusion reaches the employer, the named insured, if the employee
is the one doing the damage. The wording of the exclusion applies to
“the insured”. If the named insured had custody or control of the
property, then yes, the exclusion would apply. However, if the
employee has the property in his custody and control, no “insured”
has care, custody, or control over the property and the exclusion is
not applicable to the named insured. The named insured would still
have to be found somehow liable for the damage in order for the CGL
form to cover the property damage loss, but if that happens, the
care, custody, or control exclusion is not applicable.
“Your Product” and “Your Work” Exclusions
When a contractor negotiates with another party to perform some
work, the contractor may extend an express warranty that its
construction materials and services will be provided in a reasonably
workmanlike fashion. Even if the contractor does not express such awarranty, the mere act of holding himself or herself out as being able
to do work creates an implied warranty that the materials will be fit
for their particular purpose and the work will be performed in a
workmanlike manner. Similar warranties come into play when a
manufacturer or a seller of goods places its goods into the stream of
commerce.
Insurance underwriters often refer to the consequences that can
result from such warranties as “business risk,” or the risk that the
seller or contractor will need to repair or replace defective products
or redo faulty work at its own cost. Naturally, the business risk also
encompasses situations where the contractor’s or seller’s negligence
in performing work or in manufacturing or selling a product may
obligate it to repair or replace the work or product. While insurers
have generally been willing to insure the risk that faulty work or
products of the insured will cause bodily injury or damage to property
other than the work or product itself, and for which the insured is
legally liable, they have not been willing to insure the business risk;
that is, insurers do not wish to become the guarantors of the fitness,
quality, or reliability of the insured’s work or products. To that end,
standard general liability insurance policies contain numerous policy
provisions and exclusions aimed at excluding the business risk.
Exclusion (k) on the CGL form pertains to property damage to the
named insured’s product arising out of it or any part of it. Exclusion (l)
pertains to property damage to the named insured’s work arising out
of it or any part of it and included in the products-completed
operations hazard. Exclusion (l) does not apply if the damaged work
or the work out of which the damage arises was performed on the
named insured’s behalf by a subcontractor.
The aim of exclusion (k) is, simply, to prevent insurance coverage
under the CGL form for damage to the named insured’s own
products. It may seem strange that an insurance policy that provides
liability insurance to insureds even needs such an exclusion since noone can be liable to himself. But, the reason for the exclusion stems
mainly from the definition of “your product”.
The named insured’s product, by definition under the CGL form,
does not include real property. The fact that the product definition
now refers to other than real property stems from the fact that under
earlier editions of the CGL policy, there was no distinction made
between real and personal property. As a result, this led some
insurers to deny coverage for damage to a building that the insured
had erected, claiming that the building was a product of the named
insured, and this stance, of course, led to many legal disputes. In
order to clarify the situation, the 1986 edition of the CGL form defined
“your product” as “any goods or products, other than real property,
…” Thus, any property that is real property is not going to be
affected by the “your product” exclusion.
Now, when it comes to “your product”, it may appear to be quite
simple to separate real property from personal property. Black’s Law
Dictionary (Sixth Ed.) defines real property as “land, and generally
whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed to land”. Personal
property is defined as “everything that is the subject of ownership, not
coming under the denomination of real estate”. The following cases
present some court rulings on the subject.
In Dublin Building Systems v. Selective Insurance Company, 874
N.E.2d 788 (2007), a court of appeals in Ohio declared that buildings
constituted real property. The insurer was attempting to deny
coverage for mold damage to a building built by the insured based on
the damage to your product exclusion. The appeals court noted the
definition of your product in the general liability policy specifically
excluded real property. The court rejected the insurer’s contention
and said that real property is generally recognized as including both
land and the structures affixed thereto.And in Auto-Owners Insurance Company v. American Building
Materials, 820 F.Supp.2d 1265 (2011), the United States District
Court, M.D. Florida, ruled that drywall supplied to builders by the
insured became real property once installed in homes and thus, did
not fall within the definition of “your product”.
On the other hand, consider Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance
Company v. MI Windows & Doors, 131 So.3d 15 (2013), wherein the
District Court of Appeal of Florida, Second District, held that sliding
glass doors remained the product of the insured even after the buyer
of the doors installed them in the building and added transoms running
atop the doors. The court ruled in effect that the installation of the
glass doors in the building did not make them real property, and they
were subject to the “your product” exclusion.
However, a case from the Supreme Court of Nebraska shows
how a court’s interpretation of “your product” is the final word on what
that phrase means and how the “your product” exclusion can apply.
The case is Chief Industries, Inc. v. Great Northern Insurance
Company, 683 N.W.2d 374 (2004).
The insured in this action (Chief) brought a suit against the liability
insurer (Great Northern) for a declaratory judgment that the insurer
owed a duty to defend and indemnify the insured in a claim against
the insured arising out of the collapse of grain bins. Chief had entered
into a contract with ARASCO to manufacture, sell, and supervise the
construction of sixteen grain bins and related equipment in Saudi
Arabia. A few years after the bins were constructed, they collapsed
and ARASCO sued Chief. Chief notified its insurer, Great Northern, of
the lawsuit and after an investigation, the insurer denied coverage.
The denial was based on the your products exclusion. Chief filed a
declaratory judgment action and after rulings against the insured, the
case eventually ended up in front of the Nebraska Supreme Court.The Supreme Court noted that Chief argued the your product
exclusion did not apply because component parts of the silos were
manufactured by third parties and not by Chief, so these parts were
not the named insured’s products. However, the court said although
the components were not manufactured by Chief, the policy definition
of “your product” includes products manufactured, sold, handled, or
distributed by the named insured; since Chief sold, distributed, and
handled the component parts, the definition was met.
(As an aside, the Nebraska court, interestingly, also decided that
a silo that was most definitely erected and affixed to the land was a
product of the insured.)
Another point to note about the “your product” exclusion pertains
to the fact other parties may receive or handle the named insured’s
product or may rely on a warranty or representation concerning the
product. A question about liability may then arise.
For example, the definition declares that the named insured’s
product means any goods manufactured, sold, handled, distributed,
or disposed of by others trading under the named insured’s name. If
a retailer is selling the named insured’s product and that product
deteriorates or falls apart on the store shelves, the retailer will, of
course, want reimbursement for losses it may suffer. The named
insured cannot look to his CGL form to pay for the retailer’s claims
since exclusion (k) applies to property damage to the named
insured’s product arising out of it. If the product causes bodily injury
to someone or damages another’s property, the exclusion is not
applicable; but, damage to the product itself is not covered under the
CGL form.
Another example is the fact that the definition includes warranties
or representations made at any time with respect to the fitness,
quality, durability, performance, or use of the named insured’s
product. The named insured dealing with the retailer in the previousparagraph, and trying to find coverage for the damaged product, may
say his product came with a warranty of quality and it failed, so there
is a valid products claim. This is not correct. If a claim is based on a
product warranty or representation, there still has to be bodily injury
or property damage to property other than the named insured’s
product for the CGL form to respond. If a claim is based on the fact
that the named insured’s product did not live up to its warranties or
the representations made about it, and the only damage is to the
product itself, there is no general liability coverage.
Note also that the definition of “your product” includes the
providing of or failure to provide warnings or instructions; but, this
does not change the fact that damage to the product itself is not
covered. For example, the named insured could sell chain saws for
cutting up trees or shrubs but fail to provide instructions on how to
use the saws. If someone buys a chain saw and tries to cut up
concrete blocks, ruining the saw, and a products claim is then made,
this is excluded. If the user of the saw injures himself or damages his
property, that is a proper basis for a products claim.
The meaning of goods or products “handled” by the named
insured sometimes causes problems. The meaning of that wording
was called into question in Todd Shipyards Corp. v. Turbine
Services, Inc., 674 F.2d 401 (5th Cir. 1982). Here, a federal court of
appeals determined that a turbine upon which a subcontractor had
performed repair work was not the subcontractor’s product. The trial
court had held that the damage to product exclusion applied because
the insured had handled, i.e. touched, the component parts. The court
of appeals interpreted the term “handled” more narrowly to mean to
trade in or deal. A similar interpretation was made in the Pennsylvania
case of Friestad v. Travelers Indemnity Company, 393 A.2d 1212
(Pa. Super. 1978).
A decision by a Wisconsin court of appeals also tries to clarify just
what is meant by “products handled by the named insured”. InHolsum Foods Division of Harvest States Cooperatives v. The Home
Insurance Company, 469 N.W.2d 918 (Wisc. App. 1991), a food
manufacturer was deemed to be manufacturing a product when it
cooked, jarred, and packaged ingredients provided by a customer, as
opposed to merely providing a service to that customer. Thus, a claim
based on damage to the final package was excluded since the
finished jars of ingredients were a “product” of the named insured.
The United States district court in Oregon provided another
example of judicial thinking as to what the term “product” entails. In
Spring Vegetable Company v. Hartford Casualty Insurance
Company, 801 F. Supp. 385 (Oregon 1992), the court stated that the
injury to product exclusion barred coverage of damage to potatoes
grown by a third person but processed in a negligent manner by the
named insured; once the potatoes were in the possession of the
insured for processing purposes, they became the product of the
insured.
And, in a case from Texas (in which the Spring Vegetable decision
was mentioned), the United States District Court for the Southern
District of Texas said that title to a product is not an element of the
policy definition of the insured’s product. This case is Hi-Port, Inc. v.
American International Specialty Lines Insurance Company, 22
F.Supp.2d 596 (1997).
Here, the insured contractor blended antifreeze. It was supplied
the basic feed stocks for the antifreeze by the customer and then the
insured blended this with other chemicals in accordance with the
customer’s proprietary formula and blending procedure. The resulting
antifreeze was then packaged and distributed by the insured. A
customer complained that a silicate gel had fallen out of the
antifreeze and wanted the insured to recall the antifreeze. The
insured did so and then asked the insurer to reimburse it for the recall
expense. The insurer denied coverage based on a number of
exclusions, one of these being the damage to your product exclusion.When it addressed the your product exclusion, the district court said
that the fact that title to the feedstock and resulting antifreeze
remained in the customer’s hands did not preclude the material from
meeting the policy definition of the insured’s product which stated that
the insured’s product included goods or products handled or
distributed by the insured. And, because the antifreeze met the policy
definition, the exclusion applied.
As for the “your work” exclusion, the purpose of this exclusion is
to prevent the CGL coverage form from guaranteeing the quality of
the named insured’s work. If there is damage to the named insured’s
work, the CGL form will not cover that damage. But, if the work
injures someone or damages another’s property, then the CGL form
will respond to a claim. An example of this thinking can be found in
the case of Weedo v. Stone-E-Brick, 405 A.2d 788 (N.J. 1979).
In that case, the New Jersey Supreme Court said: “When a
craftsman applies stucco to an exterior wall of a home in a faulty
manner and discoloration, peeling and chipping result, the poorly
performed work will perforce have to be replaced or repaired by the
tradesman or by a surety. On the other hand, should the stucco peel
and fall from the wall, and thereby cause injury to the homeowner or
his neighbor standing below or to a passing automobile, an
occurrence of harm arises which is the proper subject of risk-sharing
as provided by the type of policy before us in this case. The
happenstance and extent of the latter liability is entirely unpredictable
—the neighbor could suffer a scratched arm or a fatal blow to the
skull from the peeling stonework. Whether the liability of the
businessman is predicated upon warranty theory or, preferably and
more accurately, upon tort concepts, injury to persons and damage to
other property constitute the risks intended to be covered under the
CGL.”
Another case to consider is Cogswell Farm Condominium
Association v. Tower Group, 2015 WL 149956.Lemery was responsible for the construction of twenty-four
residential condominium units between 2000 and 2003. In 2009,
Cogswell sued Lemery and others, alleging negligence and negligent
supervision in the construction of the units, specifically defective
construction of weather barrier components; the defective weather
barriers then led to water leak damage to the units.
Tower issued general liability policies to Lemery during these
years. After Cogswell sued Lemery, Cogswell filed a petition for
declaratory judgment against Tower, seeking a declaration that its
claims against Lemery were covered under the Tower policies. The
trial court decided that the insurer, Tower, did not have a duty to
defend or have an obligation to pay Cogswell if Cogswell was
successful in its underlying lawsuit against Lemery. This appeal
followed.
The Supreme Court of New Hampshire noted the Cogswell
argument that the damage for which coverage is claimed is the
damage to the nondefective work that was caused by the defectively
constructed weather barriers. Tower countered that because Lemery
was the general contractor responsible for the construction of the
units, the exclusion applies to preclude coverage for all damage
caused by Lemery’s defective work on the units that was not
defective. Tower claimed that Cogswell’s interpretation of the
exclusion would undermine the purpose of the general liability policy in
that such an interpretation would make the policy a performance
bond.
The court said that the exclusion could be interpreted in two ways.
One way is that the exclusion applies to all damage to the insured’s
work caused by the defective work. The other interpretation is that
the exclusion applies only to those parts of the property on which the
allegedly defective work was done. The first interpretation would
prevent coverage for all damage resulting from Lemery’s defective
work, including damage to the nondefective parts of the condo units.The second interpretation would preclude coverage for damage to
the defective weather barriers, but allow coverage for damage to the
nondefective parts of the units that was caused by the defective
weather barriers.
Because the exclusion is subject to more than one reasonable
interpretation in the opinion of the court, the court found the exclusion
to be ambiguous. The Supreme Court held that the exclusion applied
to property damage to the defectively constructed portions of the
units, but that it did not apply to damage to those portions of the units
that were not defectively constructed by Lemery, but were damaged
as a result of the defective work. In sum, the defective work was not
covered but resulting damage from that defective work was covered
under the terms of the insurance policy.
Another example of the intent behind the Your Work Exclusion is
the North Carolina case of Western World Insurance Company v.
Carrington, 369 S.E.2d 128 (N.C. App. 1988). In this case, a court of
appeals said that “since the quality of the insured’s work is a business
risk that is solely within his own control, liability insurance generally
does not provide coverage for claims arising out of the failure of the
insured’s work to meet the quality or specifications for which the
insured may be liable as a matter of contract.”
Besides noting the intent of the exclusion, there are some other
facets about this exclusion that merit mention.
The damage to your work exclusion pertains to the named
insured’s completed operations, not work in progress. This is shown
by the wording in the exclusion: property damage to your work arising
out of it or any part of it and included in the products-completed
operations hazard. Products-completed operations hazard is a
defined term and, suffice it to say, the definition emphasizes that the
term deals with all bodily injury or property damage occurring awayfrom the premises of the named insured and arising out of the named
insured’s work except work that has not yet been completed or
abandoned.
(As to when the work has been completed, the definition goes on
to state that the work will be deemed completed at the earliest of the
following times: when all of the work called for in the contract has
been completed; when all of the work to be done at the job site has
been completed if the contract calls for work at more than one job
site; or, when that part of the work done at a job site has been put to
its intended use by any person or organization other than another
contractor or subcontractor working on the same project. Note that
work that may need service, maintenance, correction, repair or
replacement, but which is otherwise complete, will be treated as
completed.)
There is a court decision concerning this point. In Houston
Building Service, Inc. v. American General Fire and Casualty
Company, 799 S.W.2d 308 (Tex. App. 1990), a problem arose when
the plaintiff’s employees negligently applied linseed oil to wooden
doors and door frames leading to a complaint that the oil caused
discoloration and that the doors were sticky; the owner of the building
asked Houston Building Service to pay for the damage. Houston
Building made a claim to its insurer but American General declined to
pay and Houston Building sued for coverage under its policy. Part of
the decision of the Texas court declared that Houston Building was
working on the premises under an ongoing service contract and,
therefore, the work was not completed at the time of damage.
Another court ruling discussing completed operations (and in
which the Houston Building Service decision is mentioned), is
Goodwin v. Wright, 6 P.3d 1 (2000). Here, Goodwin was injured
while operating a dump truck designed to haul and dump heavy dirt
loads; the trailer bed is raised and lowered by a hydraulic cylinder
ram. On the day of the accident, a newly-installed hydraulic cylinderram failed on the way up and the truck bed dropped suddenly.
Goodwin was injured when he bounced up and down inside the truck
cab.
The cylinder that failed came from the insured (Eastside Machine)
which had remanufactured the rebuilt dump truck cylinder. Eastside
had a general liability policy but did not purchase products-completed
operations coverage. When Goodwin sued Eastside, its insurer
(Western National Assurance Company) denied coverage, saying that
the claim was a completed operations claim, and so, was not
covered. Goodwin obtained a default judgment against Eastside and
then served a writ of garnishment on Western National. The insurer
then moved for summary judgment and the trial court granted the
motion. Goodwin appealed.
In affirming the trial court ruling, the Court of Appeals of
Washington, Division 1, discussed when a job is deemed to be
completed. The court said that as a general rule, a contract or
operation is deemed completed when the work contracted for or
undertaken has been finished and put to its intended use. Work that
may need correction or service but which is otherwise completed will
be treated as complete. The assertion by Goodwin that Eastside’s
work was incomplete because a critical operation was omitted (that
is, a lock ring between cylinder stages was either not installed or was
improperly welded) was rejected by the court; the idea that an
operation negligently performed cannot be a completed operation is
rejected. This was not a situation where the insured had an on-going
service contract (like in the Houston Building case). So, the work of
the insured was finished; the insured was paid for the work; the
object worked on by the insured was put to its intended use; this was
a completed operations claim; and, since the insured had not
purchased completed operations insurance, there was no coverage
for Goodwin’s claim.Another pertinent case deals with repair work that was done at
two separate times by the insured. This case is Brown v. Concord
Group Insurance Company, 2012 WL 1370834.
Spencer, the insured, built a house in 2003 and the plaintiffs (the
Browns) purchased it in 2005. In 2007, the Browns discovered water
leaking into the house near a sliding glass door. They contacted
Spencer to repair the problem. Spencer removed the exterior siding,
installed flashing on the windows near the leak and reinstalled the
siding. He charged the Browns $1,000 for the work. In the summer of
2009, the Browns again observed evidence of water leaking into the
house near the same sliding door. They contacted Lewis to
investigate the problem and he observed substantial water damage to
the wood behind the siding, including damage to structural
components. The Browns said that the damage was caused by
additional leaks that Spencer did not discover during his 2007 repair
work and that Spencer probably would have discovered those leaks if
he had removed all of the siding on the wall. The repair work this time
cost the Browns $16,205.
The Browns then filed a petition for declaratory judgment, alleging
that Spencer defectively repaired their house and that his insurer,
Concord Group, is required to insure against the resulting damage.
The Superior Court, Rockingham County, entered summary judgment
for the insurer and the Browns appealed.
The Browns argued that Spencer’s policy provides coverage
because Spencer negligently repaired their house in 2007 and the
damage in 2007 would not have occurred but for his negligence.
Concord argued that the property damage at issue was not caused
by an occurrence because, regardless of whether the damage was to
Spencer’s 2003 original construction of the home or his 2007 repairs,
the defective work has not caused damage to property other than his
own work product. The insurer said that the “your work” exclusion
bars recovery because any damage caused by the 2007 repair workwas damage to the insured’s work, that is, the original 2003 work on
the construction of the house.
The Supreme Court of New Hampshire noted that if “your work”
includes both the 2003 and 2007 work, then there is no material
dispute of fact with regard to the exclusion. Under such a
construction, even if it was assumed that the Browns are correct that
the damage in 2009 was caused by the 2007 repair work, the claim
would still be barred because the damage in 2009 was done to
Spencer’s 2003 original construction work. The Court said it must
thus interpret the exclusion to determine whether Spencer’s work
encompasses both the 2003 and 2007 work.
The Court said that the exclusion is triggered only if the damage
at issue is to work performed by the named insured and is included in
the products-completed operations hazard as defined. The definition
of products-completed operations hazard requires the work to be
completed and this leads to the conclusion that “your work” does
have a limitation, in that it contemplates discrete jobs that have an
endpoint. Therefore, the Court held that the exclusion does not
uniformly apply to all work ever performed by the named insured, but
rather excludes coverage on a job-by-job basis, with individual jobs
being demarcated by their completion. Accordingly, the exclusion
does not necessarily exclude coverage in a situation where an
insured’s work causes damage to something the insured had
previously constructed. If the previous work has been completed,
then it is not part of the work at issue—the current work that caused
damage to the previous work—and thus, the damage is not excluded
under the “your work” exclusion.
The Court ruled that, for the purpose of Spencer’s 2007 repairs
under the exclusion, his work only includes the 2007 repairs, not his
original construction work in 2003. The 2003 work was a separate
act, distinct from the 2007 repair work. As such, if the damage at
issue was caused by Spencer’s 2007 repair, the “your work”exclusion would exclude coverage for damage resulting from that
repair, but would not exclude coverage for damage to Spencer’s
2003 work. On the other hand, if the damage at issue was caused by
the 2003 original construction, the exclusion would exclude coverage
for any damage to that construction.
In sum, the New Hampshire Supreme Court held that “your work”
does have a limitation in that it contemplates jobs that do have an
endpoint. And so, once a repair job is completed, that is considered a
separate act from any subsequent repair work, even if the work is
done on the same location.
The “your work” exclusion does not apply if the damaged work or
the work out of which the damage arises was performed on your
behalf by a subcontractor. So, for example, if, in the Weedo case
noted previously, the stucco work had been done for the insured
contractor by a subcontractor, and the stucco peeled or chipped, a
claim over the poor work would be covered by the CGL form. The
insured may have hired the subcontractor and may be ultimately held
legally responsible for the subcontractor’s work, but when it comes to
the Your Work Exclusion, the CGL form considers the insured and the
subcontractor as two separate entities. The insured will not be
penalized because the subcontractor performed faulty work.
Moreover, the exclusion is not going to apply to the named insured’s
liability for damage to a subcontractor’s work out of which the
damage to other property arises. For example, if a subcontractor’s
faulty work causes an entire building to burn down and the named
insured general contractor is sued for the loss to the building, the
named insured’s CGL form will cover his liability for the entire amount
of the loss, even the subcontractor’s faulty work. On the other hand,
if the loss had originated in work performed by the named insured, he
would be covered only for damage to work performed by
subcontractors; there is no coverage for damage to any work
performed by the named insured.The Supreme Court of Tennessee addressed this subcontractor
exception in The Travelers Indemnity Company of America v. Moore
& Associates, Inc., 216 S.W.3d 302 (2007).
In this case, the insurer brought an action against its insured
contractor for a declaratory judgment that it owed no duty to defend
or indemnify the insured in a claim against the insured for faulty
window installation. The insured was the general contractor for the
construction of a hotel and hired a subcontractor to provide and install
the hotel windows. After completion of the construction, the tenant
made a claim against the insured alleging poor and negligent design
and implementation of the window installation resulting in water and
moisture penetration. When the case got to the Tennessee Supreme
Court, the court concluded that the entire hotel met the definition of
“your work” because the entire construction project was performed
by the named insured; therefore, all damages to the hotel would be
excluded. However, the Your Work Exclusion contained a
subcontractor exception that provided that any damages arising out
of the work performed by a subcontractor fall outside the exclusion
and are covered by the CGL form. So, damages resulting from the
subcontractor’s faulty installation of the windows were not excluded
from coverage, even if those damages affected the named insured’s
work.
If there is one main guiding principle to be followed when
analyzing the “your product” and the “your work” exclusions. It is this:
the exclusions are meant to apply to damage to the named insured’s
work and product; insurance coverage for bodily injury or damage
done to the property of others is not affected by these exclusions.
Expected or Intended
The commercial general liability coverage form (the CGL form)
contains a provision excluding from liability coverage claims for “bodily
injury” and “property damage” expected or intended by the insured.However, there is no consensus concerning the meaning of this
phrase and courts have applied a variety of definitions and tests to
determine whether liability coverage for the injury or loss should be
excluded. The following are examples:
If the insured acts with the specific intent to cause some injury,
harm, or damage, the exclusion applies. This seems simple enough
and is accepted by the majority of courts. Any discussion of or
contention with this rule centers around the issue of whether the harm
actually caused was of a different type or of a more serious nature
than was intended by the insured-actor.
If the act is intentional and results in injury which is a natural and
probable consequence of that act, the exclusion applies without
regard to whether or not some harm was intended. Some courts
follow this legal doctrine of tort law. Others reject this rule as being
inapplicable to the interpretation of contemporary general liability
insurance policies.
If the insured acted with a specific intent, but did not intend to
produce the specific damage that resulted, the exclusion does not
apply.
(It should be noted here that the exclusion applies to bodily injury
or property damage expected or intended from the standpoint of the
insured. So, the exclusion is specific when it comes to its application
and the separation of insureds clause reinforces this point.)
In those jurisdictions following the rule that the exclusion will apply
if any intent to harm is shown, even if the type or magnitude of the
resulting harm is greater than intended, it is still imperative that intent
be shown. These courts do not allow mere “foreseeability” of harm to
preclude coverage, even if the act involves foreseeableconsequences of great harm or amounts to gross or culpable
negligence.
For example, one federal appeals court, applying Florida law,
found that there was a genuine question as to the insured’s intent to
harm his friend when he shot at him with a BB gun and accidentally
struck him in the eye instead of on his chest. The insured was
following his friend’s instructions as to the use of the gun and the
friend apparently had no fear of being harmed by serving as the
target, even though the insured had shot him once before the
accident and he had exclaimed that it “hurt.” The case was sent back
for trial on the issue of intent. This case is Allstate Insurance Co. v.
Steinemer, 723 F.2d 873 (C.A. Fla. 1984).
It should be noted that many jurisdictions allow a presumption of
intent to be inferred from the nature of certain acts, such as sexual
assault upon a minor. For example, a federal appeals court applying
California law found that an accomplice to a kidnapping and rape of a
minor, while perhaps not participating in the rape, could still be
presumed to have intended harm by aiding and abetting the assault,
thereby precluding insurance coverage for his liability; the case is
State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v. Bomke, 849 F.2d 1218 (C.A.
Cal. 1988). Also, in American Family Mutual Insurance Company v.
Purdy, 483 N.W.2d 197 (S.D. 1992), the South Dakota Supreme
Court stated that an insured’s acts of sexual contact with children
were of such a nature that the intent to inflict bodily injury was
inferred as a matter of law; the exclusion based on injury either
expected or intended applied as a bar to coverage in this case. In this
case, the South Dakota supreme court noted that the majority of
jurisdictions that have addressed this issue have held that through
the very nature of acts of sexual contact or rape, injury is either
inherent or the intent to injure will be inferred as a matter of law; the
state-by-state examples were then listed.(These latter two cases are examples of the inferred intent rule
that raises a conclusive presumption of the insured’s intent to harm
the victim, regardless of the insured’s assertions of a subjective lack
of intent to harm. The intent to harm is inferred as a matter of law
from the actual commission of the act. And, because it operates as a
conclusive presumption of intent to harm, application of the rule
automatically precludes insurance coverage.)
Courts have taken a position on whether there is coverage for an
insured who intended some type of harm or property damage, but
whose act resulted in greater harm, or harm that was different from
that which was intended. For example, an insured might punch
another person in the nose, the blow causing the other party to fall
and strike his head, resulting in severe head injuries. The insured
intended to throw the punch and could expect that some sort of
damage would be done—thereby precluding coverage for expenses
related to a broken nose or eyeglasses—but the insured never
intended to cause brain damage and did not expect the other person
to strike his head in the fall.
A case with this element is State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v.
Worthington, 405 F.2d 683 (C.A. Mo. 1968). The insured fired a
shotgun in the direction of several boys whom he thought were
stealing his watermelons. One of the boys was killed and his parents
recovered a judgment against the insured. The United States eighth
circuit court of appeals found that while the discharge of the gun by
the insured was intentional, the fatal wounding of the boy was
accidental. The result was therefore unintentional and the insurer
liable.
In State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v. Groshek, 411 N.W.2d 480
(Mich. App. 1987), a Michigan appeals court found that an insured
was not covered when he struck another man from behind with a
branch, even though he may not have intended the extent of harm
caused and believed himself to be defending his girlfriend. Theinsured was called to his girlfriend’s house because she feared that
she would be sexually assaulted by her former boyfriend who was
about to visit her and who had previously raped her. When the insured
arrived, he saw the man and woman standing near each other. He
picked up the branch, hit the man from behind, inflicting extensive
injuries, and fled. The court ruled that whether viewed objectively or
subjectively, the insured, at a minimum, expected his victim to sustain
some injury, and thus the injury that did result was the “natural,
foreseeable, expected and [the] anticipatory result of [the insured’s]
intentional act.” Furthermore, the court stated that by pleading guilty
to the criminal charge of felonious assault, the injured party had
established the necessary intent or expectation to make the exclusion
apply.
On the other hand, in Prudential Property and Casualty Insurance
Company v. Swindal, 622 So.2d 467 (1993), the Supreme Court of
Florida asked the question: does the expected or intended injury
exclusion exclude coverage for bodily injury sustained where the
insured committed an intentional act intending to cause fear, but
where bodily injury may have been caused accidentally and was not
intended or expected by the insured to result. The court said no, the
exclusion did not apply.
Some courts have adopted the rule that the insured is covered for
liability unless he intended the injuries or damage actually resulting
from his act.
A case using this approach was Riverside Insurance Co. v.
Wiland, 474 N.E.2d 371 (Ohio App. 1984), in which an Ohio court of
appeals determined that “[r]eading the [exclusionary] clause strictly, it
must be read to exclude only expected or intended injuries, instead of
expected intentional acts, because there is no reference made to the
insured’s acts.” In other words, it is not sufficient to show merely that
the act was intentional; the insurer must show that the intent to injure
existed in order to apply the exclusion.In another Ohio case, Physicians Insurance Company v.
Swanson, 569 N.E.2d 906 (Ohio 1991), the state Supreme Court
stated that “to avoid coverage under the expected or intended
exclusion, the insurer must show that the insured’s act was intentional
and he expected or intended the injury itself”; the insurer had to
demonstrate that the injury itself was expected or intended. The
rationale for this holding, the court said, was twofold: first, the plain
language of the policy is in terms of an intentional or expected injury,
not an intentional or expected act; were the court to allow the
argument that only an intentional act is required, it would in effect be
rewriting the policy. Second, as many cases show, many injuries
result from intentional acts, although the injuries themselves are
wholly unintentional. The Ohio Supreme Court also noted that its
interpretation is consistent with the majority rule that has emerged
from the case law on this issue in other jurisdictions; cases from
Pennsylvania, Florida, Idaho, Georgia, and Massachusetts were
listed as examples.
However, note that in a 1986 Pennsylvania case, the Superior
Court of Pennsylvania specifically rejected the Riverside Insurance
opinion. In United Services Automobile Association v. Elitzky, 517
A.2d 982 (1986), the court rejected the view that intent means
specific intent to cause the precise injury that did occur. Such an
approach would reward wrongdoers by affording them insurance
coverage just because their plans went slightly awry. The court stated
that the Riverside court’s approach prevents difficulties of proof since
an insured would be entitled to coverage unless he admitted that he
intended the precise injury that occurred, and human nature casts
doubt that such testimony would be forthcoming.
The cases in the previous section employ the “specific intent to
injure rule.” In opposition to this is the “natural and probable
consequences” test. This latter test holds that where an intentional
act results in injuries that are a natural and probable result of the act,
the injuries are intentional and therefore, the intentional injuryexclusion is applicable. An example of the natural and probable rule
can be seen in Harris v. Richards, 867 P.2d 325 (Kan. 1994),
wherein the Kansas Supreme Court expressly rejected the specific
intent approach. In Harris, the court was faced with a suit based on
the insured shooting two shotgun rounds into the back window of a
pickup; the claimant said that the insured was trying to shoot the
insured’s ex-wife and that he, the claimant, was shot by accident. The
Kansas Supreme Court rejected the claimant’s position and said that
the “uncontroverted facts in the case show that the insured fired two
shotgun blasts into the cab of the pickup when he knew it was
occupied. The claimant’s injuries are to be viewed as the natural and
probable consequences of the insured’s act”. Therefore, the liability
provision in an insurance contract excluding coverage for injuries
expected or intended from the standpoint of the insured excluded
coverage for the claimant.
Another case using this rule is Casualty Reciprocal Exchange v.
Thomas, 647 P.2d 1361 (Kan. App. 1982), in which a Kansas
appeals court found that showing the act of firing a gun at the victim
was intentional (without any explanation that harm was not intended)
was sufficient for the exclusion to apply. The insured was angry at a
group of young people who were having a party in a nearby house,
some of whom had driven their cars across his yard. He called the
police and told an officer that the next time one of the partygoers
drove across his yard, he would take care of it himself and then call
the police. The officer left. One young man pulled his car back into
the insured’s driveway to let another person from the party pass,
whereupon the insured, outraged, yanked the car door open, struck
the man with a pistol, and then held it to his temple. Another young
man from the party came up to see what was happening, but kept his
distance. Nevertheless, the insured aimed at this second young man
and shot him. The court stated, “Under these facts, to say that the
act of aiming and firing the gun was intentional, but the injury was not,
draws too fine a distinction. The better rule is that where anintentional act results in injuries which are a natural and probable
result of the act, the injuries are intentional.”
And in Auto Club Group Insurance Company v. Burchell, 249
Mich. App. 468 (2001), the Court of Appeals of Michigan stated that
“in order for an injury to be expected, it must be the natural,
foreseeable, expected, and anticipated result of an intentional act by
the insured, and the intended or expected language in the insurance
policy bars coverage for injuries caused by an insured who acted
intentionally despite his awareness that harm was likely to follow from
his conduct”. The court went on to state “for the purpose of
determining an insurer’s liability to defend under an insurance policy
that excludes coverage for expected or intended injury, when an
insured’s intentional actions create a direct risk of harm, there can be
no liability coverage for any resulting damage or injury, despite the
lack of an actual intent to damage or injure”. In this case, the court
denied coverage based on a claim for injuries that resulted from a
barroom brawl.
Other courts have specifically rejected this rule and have stated
that the insured’s subjective intent must be determined in order to rule
on whether the exclusion applies.
In Farmers Insurance Group v. Sessions, 607 P.2d 422 (Idaho
1980), the Supreme Court of Idaho sent a case back for trial on the
issue of intent even though the insured had committed an intentional
act that had resulted in bodily injury and property damage. The
insured went to dinner with his wife at a tavern. Service was poor and
the insured became angry. He complained to the manager, and they
had a heated exchange. As the insured and his wife were leaving the
tavern, the manager made an insulting gesture. The insured shoved a
tray of drinks off the bar and threw a bar stool and left. The court
said, “[I]t is insufficient to bring the exclusionary provision into
operation if admitting there was an intentional act, the injury itself was
not intentional but was merely negligent or an inadvertent result of theoriginal intentional act. Thus if [the insured] acted intentionally toward
another person and secondarily injured [the manager], or if he
intended only to throw the barstool and the glasses at, but not
specifically to injure [the manager], the insurance company remains
liable under the terms of the policy.” The court also stated that it did
follow the rule that once some intent to cause harm was shown, then
the exclusion would apply even if the resulting damage or injury were
greater than anticipated.
In Queen City Farms, Inc. v. The Central National Insurance
Company of Omaha, 827 P.2d 1024 (Wn. App. 1992), a court of
appeals in Washington also accepted the subjective standard, stating
that “coverage would be precluded only if the insured subjectively
expected and intended to cause the damage that occurred.” This
court went on to say that “even gross negligence or willful and wanton
conduct may be covered where there has been no actual intent to
injure.”
The question has sometimes arisen as to whether injuries inflicted
in self-defense or to protect property are excluded from liability
coverage. This question should be resolved in the current CGL form,
wherein it is provided that the expected or intended exclusion does
not apply “to bodily injury resulting from the use of reasonable force
to protect persons or property.” Of course, this begs the question of
what “reasonable force” is, but that issue is handled on a case by
case basis with the facts of each situation brought out for the jury to
hear.
In any case, the following cases are presented for some guidance
in this area.
In Fire Insurance Exchange v. Berray, 694 P.2d 191 (Ariz. 1984),
two persons involved in an argument over a pool room bet exchanged
words at an intersection and “agreed to pull into a vacant servicestation to further discuss their disagreement.” As the insured stepped
from his vehicle, he was assaulted by the other party and hit several
times. He managed to reach into his vehicle, obtain a gun, and
warned the other party to keep away. When the other person took a
step toward him, he fired, severely wounding the person.
The wounded party brought a lawsuit against the insured. The
insured was covered for liability under a homeowners policy, but the
insurer denied coverage based on the intentional injury provision. A
trial court entered summary judgment in favor of the insurance
company, but this decision was reversed on appeal. The Arizona
Supreme Court reviewed the case and upheld the appeals court’s
decision. The Supreme Court stated that the intentional injury
provision does not apply when an insured acts in self-defense or with
other legal justification, saying, “In such cases, the question of intent
must be resolved by a determination of the basic purpose or desire
underlying the insured’s conduct.” The court agreed with the appeals
court’s assessment that “an act committed in self-defense should not
be considered an intentional act within the meaning of the exclusion
… While the act of shooting a person in self-defense is intentional in a
narrow sense, in a broader sense it is not. One confronted with the
need to defend himself has had the situation thrust upon him and
matters have progressed to a point where action is the only resort.
There is a close similarity between such a circumstance and events
that we think of as conventional accidents.”
On the other hand, in Aetna Casualty and Surety Company v.
Griss, 568 So. 2d 903 (Fla. 1990), the Florida Supreme Court
declared that the use of deadly force in self-defense was intentional
conduct causing harm to another and was within the scope of a policy
exclusion from coverage of intentional acts. It should be noted that
the court stated that it was aligning itself with the majority of
jurisdictions in holding that self-defense is not an exception to an
insurance policy’s intentional acts exclusion. An insured should beaware of this point if his or her liability policy does not clearly make
self-defense an exception to the expected or intended exclusion.
The Florida Supreme Court’s ruling can be questioned on at least
two grounds. First, current liability policies themselves allow an
exception for self-defense, so how can a “majority of jurisdictions”
hold that self-defense is not an exception to the exclusion? Perhaps,
the Florida court and the other jurisdictions dealt with insurance
policies that do not have the self-defense exception language.
Second, the Florida court may have made its decision based on the
use of deadly force, considering this to not be “reasonable force” as
the liability policy requires. In any case, as noted previously, what
“reasonable force” is and whether the exception applies has to be
decided on a case by case basis.
The insured’s intoxication or mental illness has been viewed by
some courts as having an influence on the insured’s ability to form the
intention necessary to preclude liability coverage.
In a New Jersey Supreme Court case, Burd v. Sussex Mutual
Insurance Co., 267 A.2d 7 (N.J. 1970), the insured inflicted shotgun
wounds on his friend. The insured was drunk and wandering around
his house with loaded weapons when the friend arrived after being
called to come and help by the insured’s wife. The friend was shot
after the insured fired into the dark. The insured was convicted of the
criminal charge of atrocious assault and battery. The victim then
brought an action for damages, and the insurer refused to defend or
indemnify the insured. The victim won his claim for damages and the
insured sued his insurer to recover the amount of the judgment and
his defense costs.
The court stated, “We could not say … that the conviction must be
accepted as a finding that the injuries were intentionally inflicted within
the meaning of the policy exclusion. With respect to voluntaryintoxication, the public policy considerations applicable to a criminal
prosecution are not decisive as to liability insurance coverage … The
burden is the carrier’s to bring the case within the policy exclusion …
Thus, as to intoxication, although in the criminal trial the jury was
instructed that it was the defendant’s burden to prove and persuade
that he was so intoxicated as not to be able to form the intent to
commit the atrocious assault and battery, here the burden would be
the carrier’s to prove and persuade that the injuries were within the
exclusion …” The court sent the case back for further proceedings in
light of its determination on the issue of intent.
In Long v. Coates, 806 P.2d 1256 (Wn. App. 1990), a court of
appeals in Washington found the reasoning in the Burd case
persuasive. The court said that the intentional injury exclusion did not
bar coverage because the insured was so intoxicated at the time of
inflicting the injury that he did not have the mental capacity to form an
intent to commit the act in question. Indeed, the court stated that “the
majority of other jurisdictions that have considered this question have
held that for purposes of invoking the exclusionary clause, intoxication
may negate an insured’s mental capacity to form an intent.”
In contrast to these two cases is a Georgia appeals court
decision wherein the court refused to overturn the trial court’s finding
that the insured, a fourteen-year old boy, acted with intent when he
and a companion destroyed a store by setting fire to it; the case is
Thrift-Mart, Inc. v. Commercial Union Assurance Cos., 268 S.E.2d
397 (Ga. App. 1980). The court stated, “There was … no error in
failing to grant [the insured’s] motions for … new trial on the ground
that due to his intoxication [he] was incapable of the requisite intent or
expectation so as to exclude a harm resulting from his acts from
insurance coverage. This issue was submitted to the jury and decided
adversely to the [insured].”
Many courts have held that as a matter of law, an insane person
cannot intentionally cause injury as excluded in insurance policies.For example, the Supreme Court of Minnesota in State Farm Fire
and Casualty Company v. Wicka, 474 N.W.2d 324 (1991) declared
that “the insured’s acts are deemed unintentional where the insured
because of mental illness or defect, either does not know the nature
or wrongfulness of the act, or is deprived of the ability to control his
conduct regardless of any understanding of the nature of the act or
its wrongfulness”. In this case, the insured shot an individual but the
facts revealed that the insured suffered a possible mental
derangement and violent mood swings before the shooting. The court
denied the application of the expected or intended injury exclusion.
A case that refused to go quite that far was Rajspic v. Nationwide
Mutual Insurance Co., 718 P.2d 1167 (Idaho 1986). The Idaho
Supreme Court determined that although the victim of a shooting by a
mentally ill woman had recovered damages because insanity was not
a defense to the intentional tort of assault and battery, this decision
did not determine whether the insured acted intentionally within the
meaning of the insurance policy. The insurer, at a trial on the policy
issue, would be required to establish that the insured had the
necessary intent, despite her mental illness. The court asserted, “To
hold that a mental defect is irrelevant for purposes of determining
whether an act is intentional is inconsistent with long-standing
principles and policy considerations of insurance law. Exclusionary
provisions are to be strictly construed against an insurer …
Furthermore, to deny coverage for acts caused by an individual
lacking the mental capacity to act rationally is inconsistent with a
primary purpose for incorporating intentional act exclusions into
insurance policies, i.e., to preclude individuals from benefiting
financially when they deliberately cause injury.”
Occurrence
The term “occurrence” appears a number of times in standard
liability policies, and disagreement as to its meaning has led to
conflicts between insurers and insureds; often, in fact, these debateshave resulted in litigation. The phrase “caused by an occurrence,”
contained in many standard liability insuring agreements, has been
troublesome despite the fact that “occurrence” is defined in the policy.
Nevertheless, many legal actions have centered around the issue of
what constitutes an occurrence for purposes of liability coverage.
Although there is some difference in the phrasing of the insuring
agreements in the previous general liability (CGL) coverage forms
and the current policy (CG 00 01 04 13), all forms provide coverage
for acts or omissions caused by an occurrence. The 1973 policy’s
insuring agreement pledges to pay on behalf of the insured all sums
the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of
bodily injury or property damage “caused by an occurrence.” The
current CGL form employs simplified language to promise: “We will
pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as
damages because of bodily injury or property damage … This
insurance applies to bodily injury and property damage only if the
bodily injury or property damage is caused by an occurrence …”
(Note that even the claims-made policy requires that the bodily injury
or property damage be caused by an occurrence.)
“Occurrence” is defined in the 1973 liability policy and the current
CGL forms in generally consistent terms. In the 1973 policy, an
occurrence is “an accident, including continuous or repeated exposure
to conditions, which results in bodily injury or property damage neither
expected nor intended from the standpoint of the insured.” In the
current CGL forms, the term is defined as “an accident, including
continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general
harmful conditions.” Although bodily injury and property damage
usually results immediately upon contact with someone or something,
the phrase “continuous or repeated exposure” eliminates the
necessity of proving the exact moment at which damage is sustained.
Injury and damage from gradual exposure is included in the definition.
Thus, the definition of occurrence cannot be interpreted as limiting
coverage to a single event.For example, a single accident where a few drops of paint might
splatter on an unintended object could result in barely perceptible
damage, but repetition of the same accident on the same object
could result in considerable damage over time. Another example is
where an insured repeatedly—but unintentionally—strikes a
neighbor’s fence abutting the driveway with a lawn mower. Each time
the fence is lightly hit, it weakens until finally it falls without an
apparent single occurrence. Such damage is covered under liability
policies due to the “continuous or repeated exposure” wording in the
definition.
A case in which an insurer attempted to deny coverage for
gradual exposure claiming there had been no occurrence in spite of a
definition containing the phrase “including injurious exposure to
conditions,” is Boggs v. Aetna Casualty and Surety, 252 S.E.2d 565
(S.C. 1979). In this case, the South Carolina Supreme Court held that
seepage of water over a period of time was a covered occurrence.
Litigation arose over construction of a home by an insured
contractor. Prior to completion of the home, difficulty with drainage of
the lot developed. The contractor agreed in writing to correct the
problem, but was unable to do so. The owners filed suit for damages.
The builder’s insurer denied liability and refused to provide a defense
in the action. The insured settled the lawsuit, and brought suit against
the insurer for reimbursement of the settlement amount and other
costs. The court stated the pivotal question was whether the seepage
of water into the house, allegedly caused by the builder’s negligent
decision to place the home on that particular portion of the lot, was
an occurrence within the meaning of the policy.
The insurer argued the word occurrence should be construed “as
an accident referable to a sudden happening.” The court decided in
favor of the insured, holding the insurer’s construction of the word
“occurrence” to be erroneous. The court adopted an often stated
concept that occurrence encompasses a broader range of incidentsthan does the term “accident.” The phrase “injurious exposure to
conditions” incorporated in the policy definition of occurrence
“indicates an occurrence need not be sudden but may be produced
over a period of time.”
Another continuous exposure case is Air Products & Chemicals,
Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Company, 707 F. Supp. 762
(D.C. Pa. 1989). Here, the United States District Court in
Pennsylvania dealt with liability claims arising out of the use of
asbestos in the making of products by Air Products. The district court
sided with the insured in upholding the continuous nature
interpretation of “occurrence.” (Note that this case was vacated and
remanded in part; but, this action was not based on the interpretation
of “occurrence.” This action came in Air Products and Chemicals,
Inc. v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company, 25 F.3d 177 (3d
Cir. 1994).)
Some other cases of note on this point are: Fina v. Travelers
Insurance Company, 184 F.Supp.2d 547 (2002); Stonelight Tile v.
California Insurance Guaranty Association, 150 Cal.App.4th 19
(2007); LSJ Technologies v. U.S. Fire Insurance Company, 2010 WL
5646054; and Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s v. Valiant Insurance
Company, 229 P.3d 930 (2010).
Note also that the term “occurrence” encompasses more than just
an accident because accident is narrower in scope than occurrence.
This can be seen in those cases decided before the occurrence
wording was adopted. Accident, according to these cases, did not
include coverage for damage occurring over time. For example, in
A.D. Irwin Investments, Inc. v. Great American Insurance Company,
475 P.2d 633 (Colo. App. 1970), a Colorado appeals court decided in
the insurer’s favor when the insured became liable for damage to an
apartment building resulting from the accumulation of condensation
from an air conditioning system.The court said, “We find it sufficient to state here that, in our
opinion, damage which occurs and reoccurs over a continued period
of time from gradual accumulation of condensate or from the
functioning or removal of inadequately powered and improperly
installed motors is not the result of an accident.”
To bolster the point that policy language matters, in the case of
Honeycomb Systems, Inc. v. Admiral Insurance Company, 567 F.
Supp. 1400 (1983), the court here referenced the A.D. Irwin case
and said that case “appears to consider pre-1966 CGL policies that
did not contain the phrase ‘including continuous or repeated exposure
to conditions’ as part of the definition of accident”. After the
“occurrence” wording was made a part of the liability policy, courts
had no trouble going beyond the limits of “accident” when deciding
coverage questions. Yakima Cement Products Company v. Great
American Insurance Company, 590 P.2d 371 (Wash. App. Ct. 1979)
is an illustration of this process.
A manufacturer of concrete products entered into an agreement
to produce and deliver eighty-one panels to a construction site. After
installation of the concrete panels, it was discovered that thirty-eight
were seriously defective. The defects were caused by negligent
manufacture. Corrections delayed construction, which resulted in a
substantial increase in costs to the project; in addition, the
Washington appeals court found that the roof was damaged by
weather exposure.
The contractor refused to pay the concrete manufacturer, claiming
the damages it suffered exceeded the agreed price of the products.
The manufacturer sued to recover on the contract and the builder
counter sued for the damage to the roof and costs involved in the
delayed construction. The manufacturer turned to its liability insurer to
defend the action, but the insurer denied coverage on the ground that
the suit alleged a breach of contract and insurance coverage was
available only for damage caused by an occurrence.The Washington court of appeals held an occurrence to be
broader in meaning than an accident. The court ruled an occurrence
required three elements: (1) an accident; (2) resulting damage; (3)
neither expected nor intended by the insured. “Here, the
misfabrication … was the result of negligence on the part of [the
insured] … [The insured] was unaware of the defects … at the time
of delivery. The subsequent rejection … and resulting property
damage to the roof … was unintended and unforeseen. Thus … there
was an occurrence within the terms of the policy.”
Note that the Supreme Court of Washington, in Yakima Cement
Products Company v. Great American Insurance Company, 608 P.2d
254 (Wash. 1980), did reverse the appeals court decision. However,
the reversal was based on the question of whether property damage
existed; the court did agree that the negligent manufacture of the
panels was an occurrence. Indeed, the Washington Supreme Court
gave an extensive discussion of why it found that an occurrence within
the meaning of the policy had taken place. The court rejected the
insurer’s contention that there could be no accident when the
misfabrication of the concrete panels was the direct result of the
manufacturer’s volitional and intentional acts. The court asserted that,
“In the area of products liability, if insurance coverage does not
extend to the deliberate manufacture of a product which inadvertently
is mismanufactured, and thereafter results in property damage, the
coverage would be rendered virtually meaningless.”
Occurrence, the court said, was broader in scope than accident,
and “As these words are generally understood, accident means
something that must have come about or happened in a certain way,
while occurrence means something that happened or came about in
any way. Thus accident is a special type of occurrence, but
occurrence goes beyond such special confines… It would, therefore,
seem that from the usual and ordinary meaning of the words used,
the word “occurrence” extends to events included within the term“accident”, and also to such conditions, not caused by accident, which
may produce an injury not purposely or deliberately.”
Also, though primarily concerned with the meaning of property
damage, the United States seventh circuit court of appeals
addressed what constitutes an occurrence—and what does not—in
Hamilton Die Cast v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty, 508 F.2d 417 (7th Cir.
1975).
The case dealt with the manufacture of defective tennis racket
frames, sold to the manufacturer of tennis rackets. The rackets were
found to be defective after they had been completely assembled,
causing their withdrawal from the market. The racket manufacturer
sued the frame maker to recover the resulting loss.
The frame maker’s insurer denied coverage and refused to
defend the action, stating there had been no occurrence under the
terms of the form. The maker sued the insurer in an attempt to find
coverage, contending there had been property damage to the finished
product, the tennis racket, by reason of the incorporation of the
defective part.
The court found for the insurer, basically because it ruled there
had been no property damage as defined in the form, but also
because there had been no occurrence. However, the court noted
there could have been an occurrence for liability purposes “if one of
the completed rackets had broken during normal use due to the
defective frames and a person or an item of property had been
harmed … Such a situation would clearly be an accident … The
policy does not cover an occurrence of alleged negligent
manufacture; it covers negligent manufacture that results in an
occurrence.”Another area where the question of what an occurrence is can be
found in construction liability disputes. For example, if the insured did
faulty work or left a work site in an unfinished condition, is that an
occurrence? After all, the insured did his work, or left his work, on
purpose and not by accident.
In Oak Crest Construction Company v. Austin Mutual Insurance
Company, 998 P.2d 1254 (Or. 2000), the Supreme Court of Oregon
handled a case where one of the issues was whether costs incurred
by a general contractor during construction of custom homes for
repairing faulty painting work of a subcontractor arose from an
occurrence. Occurrence was defined on the policy as an accident,
including repeated exposure to similar conditions. The court
acknowledged that, in some circumstances, property damage that
results from the negligent performance of a contract can qualify as
being caused by an accident; but, the court went on, an accident has
a tortious connotation and exists only when damage results from a
tort. In other words, although negligent performance of a contract
might cause damage by accident, there is no tort and no accident
(hence, no occurrence) when the damage results solely from the
complete failure of performance of a contract.
In another case from Missouri, an appeals court held that a
breach of implied warranties in connection with a construction job
cannot fall within the term “accident”. Here, a claim arose against the
insured over alleged failure to build a house in workmanlike manner
and in accordance with a contract. The insured sought coverage
under his CGL form but coverage was denied, with one issue being
that there was no occurrence. After examining the facts of the case,
the court said that this was a breach of contractual obligations, and
that the insured’s failure to perform cannot be characterized as an
undesigned or unexpected event. There was no occurrence here and
without an occurrence as defined on the policy, the insured was not
covered for the claim. The case is Hawkeye Insurance Company v.
John Davis dba Davis Construction, 6 S.W.3d 419 (Mo. App. 1999).The drafters of the liability policy apparently intended to limit
liability for continuous or repeated exposure to the same general
conditions to a single occurrence, rather than having each result or
claim from the same incident counted as a different occurrence. In
other words, the cause of the alleged damages should be looked at
as to whether one occurrence or several occurrences took place.
This cause theory holds that the number of occurrences for purposes
of applying coverage limitations must be determined by referring to
the cause of the damage, and not to the number of injuries or claims
that may arise out of the incident. In the 1973 policy, this theory was
represented by a clause under the limits of liability section stating,
“For the purpose of determining the limit of the company’s liability, all
bodily injury and property damage arising out of continuous or
repeated exposure to substantially the same general conditions shall
be considered as arising out of one occurrence.” Today, although the
language of the current CGL form is structured differently, the intent
is the same. The limiting language is contained in the definition of
occurrence. An occurrence is defined as “an accident, including
continuous or repeated exposure to substantially the same general
harmful conditions.”
The cause theory is, of course, subject to different judicial
interpretations in its application to liability claims. The following cases
represent some varying discussions on the issue.
In Maurice Pincoffs Company v. St. Paul Fire & Marine
Insurance Company, 315 F. Supp. 964 (D.C. Tex. 1970), the insured
imported bird seed that was sold to eight feed and grain dealers. The
seed was apparently contaminated with a chemical insecticide, prior
to receipt by the insured, and caused the death of many birds. The
insured had two liability policies, a general liability policy with $50,000
per occurrence and $100,000 aggregate limits and an umbrella policy
issued by another insurer. The primary insurer took the position that
the contamination of birdseed was the single occurrence. It paid the$50,000 per occurrence limit and declared its obligation fulfilled.
There were still a number of outstanding claims.
The umbrella insurer argued, however, that there were multiple
occurrences and it was not obligated to respond until the primary
insurer had paid claims amounting to the aggregate limit. It was left to
the court to decide if the incident involved one, or multiple,
occurrences.
The primary insurer contended that the prevailing view must be to
look to the cause of the occurrence rather than the effect. Therefore,
there was but one cause—the contaminated seed—and while there
were many claimants, there was only one accident or occurrence.
The trial court agreed.
However, in Maurice Pincoffs Company v. St. Paul Fire & Marine
Insurance Company, 447 F.2d 204 (5th Cir. 1971), the lower court’s
decision was appealed and overruled. The appeals court held that
while damage to the birds was caused by contamination, the
insured’s liability resulted from the sale of seed. The court reasoned
that if the insured had destroyed the seed instead of selling it, no loss
would have occurred. Since it was the sale that created the exposure
to conditions that resulted in property damage, each of the eight
sales to the grain dealers was considered a new exposure and a
separate occurrence. The primary insurer, therefore, was required to
pay an additional $50,000, or an aggregate of $100,000, before the
excess insurer was obliged to begin responding.
Along the same lines, American Indemnity Company v. McQuaig,
435 So. 2d 414 (Fla. App. 1983), held that the injuring of two
deputies with three shotgun blasts by the insured constituted three
separate occurrences for purposes of the insured’s homeowners
liability coverage.The police officers were attempting to convince the insured to
surrender when he began shooting at them. The first officer was hit, a
minute later another blast injured both officers, and a third, forty-five
seconds later, injured the second officer again. The insured’s liability
policy provided $100,000 coverage, per occurrence. A claim was
filed by one of the officers, and he was paid $100,000 by the insurer,
who then denied any further liability. The second injured officer asked
the court for a determination of whether this payment exhausted the
insurer’s obligation.
The Florida court of appeals ruled that the question involved was
whether “there was but one proximate, uninterrupted, and continuous
cause which resulted in all of the injuries and damages.” The insurer
contended there was one occurrence, because the injuries were
caused by one instrument of danger, the shotgun, and occurred in
one very specific location in one brief time period of less than two
minutes. Further, the insured’s insanity was the single proximate
cause of injury.
The court ruled against the insurer. “While it is true that but for his
insanity, [the insured’s] act would have been intentional and therefore
excluded … it does not follow that his insanity was the proximate
cause of … injuries. It is clear that the proximate cause of [the first
officer’s] injuries was the shotgun blasts which struck him and the
proximate cause of [the second officer’s] injuries was the blasts that
struck him. Under the cause theory, there was not one proximate,
uninterrupted and continuous cause which resulted in the injuries and
damages but rather three separate causes.” The court held there
were three occurrences, and therefore, three $100,000 per
occurrence limits.
Applying Wisconsin law in the case of American Motorists
Insurance Company v. Trane, 544 F. Supp. 669 (D.C. Wis. 1982), a
federal court, applying the cause theory, found that an on-goingcause of harm constitutes one occurrence when there is just one
proximate, uninterrupted, and continuing cause for all damage.
In this case, the question concerning the number of occurrences
arose when the production of liquified natural gas at a new plant was
less than expected. It took three years to determine that the shortfall
was due to a Trane company heat exchanger used in the process of
reducing natural gas to a liquid form. Once the problem was
pinpointed, the Trane heat exchanger was replaced by one from
another company, with good results. It was uncertain which policy
applied since the malfunction of the heat exchanger was of an on-
going nature. The court found that the damages constituted “one
occurrence stemming from a single injury: the operation of the
defective Trane heat exchanger.” The policy in effect when the
damage first became apparent to the insured, in this case shortly
after the plant began operations, was the one that applied.
In another case, the insurer in Owens-Illinois v. Aetna Casualty
and Surety, 597 F. Supp. 1515 (D.C. D.C. 1984), attempted to
convince the court that there had been multiple occurrences rather
than a single occurrence where hundreds of claims were brought
against the insured for exposure to asbestos due to a product
manufactured by the insured. In this case, each occurrence was
subject to a deductible, and no single claim against the insured (who
was self-insured to high limits) exceeded the deductible.
The United States district court was asked to decide whether the
insured’s liability arose from a single occurrence—that being the
manufacture and sale of the product containing asbestos, or multiple
occurrences, being each individual claimant’s exposure to the
asbestos. The court noted that regarding the manufacture and sale of
the product as a single occurrence would require the insured to
absorb a single deductible from the total policy aggregate, leaving the
insurer to satisfy the excess liability. On the other hand, if each claim
were to be considered a separate occurrence, the insured wouldhave to absorb the deductible on each claim. The court noted that
following this logic, the interpretation “would effectively deny
coverage because the deductibles are larger than any claim
successfully brought against” the insured.
So the court determined that the manufacture and sale of the
insulation was a single occurrence. Reading the policy’s definition of
occurrence in conjunction with the wording contained in the limits of
liability provision pertaining to repeated or continuous exposure being
considered one occurrence, the court ruled in the insured’s favor.
“Given the … definition of occurrence and the … unifying provisions,
the calculation of the number of occurrences focuses on the
underlying circumstances which resulted in the personal injury and
claims for damage rather than each individual claimant’s injury … The
provisions make it clear that the number of injuries or claims … are
irrelevant when determining the number of occurrences.”
In Appalachian Insurance Company v. Liberty Mutual Insurance
Company, 676 F.2d 56 (C.A. Pa. 1982), the federal appeals court
noted that the majority of jurisdictions employ a cause test that asks
if “there was but one proximate, uninterrupted, and continuing cause
which resulted in all of the injuries and damage.” If the answer to the
question is that the injuries did indeed stem from one proximate
cause, there is a single occurrence. Quoting from the Appalachian
case, another federal appeals court, in Michigan Chemical
Corporation v. American Home Assurance Company, 728 F.2d 374
(1984), noted that the vast majority of courts concluded that “the
number of occurrences is determined by the cause of the damage
and not by the number of injuries or claims.”
In summary, if the facts of the individual case show that there was
one proximate and continuous cause for the injuries, these cases say
that most courts will find that one occurrence happened. So, the
cause theory or test should be considered a valid (and the most
broadly accepted) concept in determining the number of occurrences.However, it should be noted that these two cases have been sharply
critiqued by several courts around the country over the years. Neither
of the cases has been overruled, but some courts have declined to
follow the rulings.
Determining the date of occurrence—when an injury can be said
to have occurred—has become a heated area of litigation in recent
years, primarily concerning workers’ exposure to such things as
asbestos and other harmful disease-causing substances. There is
usually no such conflict when it comes to when property damage
occurs. This is because the prevailing rule is that property damage
occurs at the time the damage is discovered or when it has
manifested itself. For an example of this ruling, see Wrecking
Corporation of America, Virginia, Inc. v. Insurance Company of
North America, 574 A.2d 1348 (D.C. D.C. 1990). However, as noted,
the timing of bodily injury is not so clear-cut.
At issue in the bodily injury type of case is a determination of
when the injury occurred, considering that there may be as many as
twenty-five years or even more between exposure to the substance
and manifestation of illness and a number of different insurers’
policies covering the time period in question. At the base of the
problem is assessing which policy covers the insured’s liability: the
policy in effect at the time of exposure; the policy covering the
operation when the disease is diagnosed; or any policy in-between
these times.
Such difficulties can arise out of the 1973 policy’s definition of
bodily injury. The term is defined as injury, sickness, or disease that
occurs during the policy period. It is the meaning of occurs that spurs
disputes: does such an injury occur at the time a person is exposed
to the harmful substance, or does the injury occur when the disease
reaches the diagnosable stage? As for the current CGL forms, the
occurrence requirement (and any subsequent difficulty) is in the
insuring agreements. The occurrence version of the CGL formdeclares that the insurance applies only if the bodily injury or property
damage occurs during the policy period; the claims-made version of
the CGL form deals with bodily injury or property damage occurring
between the retroactive date and the end of the policy period.
Several approaches have been developed by insurers, insureds,
and their legal representatives as to when bodily injury can be said to
have occurred. Four theories that have found acceptance by various
courts are: the exposure theory; the manifestation theory; the
injurious process theory (also called the triple-trigger or multiple
trigger theory); and the injury-in-fact theory. There is a good
discussion of the theories, and multiple cases on the theories are
listed, in Armstrong World Industries, Inc. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety
Company, 26 Cal. Rptr.2d 35 (Cal. App. 1993); this case may not be
cited as precedent, especially since it was superseded by In re
Asbestos Insurance Coverage Cases, 866 P.2d 1311 (1994), but the
discussion of the theories and the cases listed are still worth reading.
Also, as implied, the advocacy of these four theories show that there
is no iron-clad rule that is followed by every single court in the land.
Advocates of the exposure theory hold that when the disease
manifests itself has nothing to do with when the bodily injury took
place. Liability coverage is triggered (and therefore covered by the
policy in effect at the time) by the victim’s exposure to the harm-
causing agent, whether or not the disease manifests itself during the
policy period. This is not to imply that the only liability coverage lies
with the insurer covering the period of first exposure, because an
employee may have been exposed to asbestos over a considerable
number of years. The United States sixth circuit court of appeals
adopted the exposure theory in INA v. Forty-Eight Insulations, Inc.,
633 F.2d 1212 (6th Cir. 1980).
The leading case in which the manifestation theory was adopted is
Eagle-Picher Industries v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, 682
F.2d 12 (1st Cir. 1982). Simply put, the manifestation theory statesthat it is the date of actual diagnosis of the disease, or with respect
to those cases in which no diagnosis was made prior to death, the
date of death that determines the date of occurrence.
The United States first circuit court of appeals in Eagle-Picher
based its decision on the construction of the insurance policy. “Both
bodily injury and occurrence are defined in the policy. Each term … is
linked by the use of causal connectors such as by reason of, because
of, and caused by or arising out of. Liability is caused by injury, and
injury in turn is caused by an occurrence. This construction implies
that liability, injury, and occurrence, while necessarily connected, are
nevertheless distinguishable. It further means that each element is
expected to occur separately in time.”
The court further stated that an occurrence must contain two
elements, neither one alone sufficient to trigger liability coverage:
initial exposure or accident and resulting injury. “There can be no
question but that the aspect of the occurrence which must take place
within the policy period, however, is the result, that is, the time when
the accident or injurious exposure produces personal injury … the
definition language explicitly focuses on the result rather than the
cause as the component to which coverage is linked.”
The injurious process theory (or triple trigger), adopted by the
United States district court, in Owens-Illinois v. Aetna Casualty &
Surety, 597 F. Supp. 1515 (D.C. D.C. 1984) is the theory most costly
to liability insurers. Relying on an earlier decision, Keene Corp. v.
INA, 667 F.2d 1034 (D.C. D.C. 1981), the court held that the
occurrence was a continuing process beginning with the inhalation of
fibers, proceeding through the damage caused by fibers in residence
in the lungs, and ending with the manifestation of the disease.
Accordingly, any policy in effect during any point in this process
covered the insured’s liability. Another example of a case that applied
the Keene court’s multiple trigger theory is Eli Lilly and Company v.
Home Insurance Company, 482 N.E.2d 467 (Ind. 1985), a casedealing with DES injuries and decided by the Indiana Supreme Court.
Although Lilly’s policies were manuscript policies, the provisions were
identical to the comprehensive general liability policy in all material
respects. The court held that Lilly was to be indemnified by each
insurer on the risk between the ingestion of DES and the
manifestation of a DES-related illness.
Finally, a theory that appears to be gaining some acceptance is
the injury-in-fact rule. It differs from the other theories in that the
central issue for determination is when the injury actually occurred, so
that coverage is provided if injury actually is suffered during the policy
term. This approach was first described in the case of American
Home Products Corporation v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company,
748 F.2d 760 (2nd Cir. 1984), in which the Second Circuit federal
court of appeals rejected both the position of the insured (a
pharmaceutical company) and the insurer in arriving at its
determination of when coverage was triggered.
The court, in rejecting the insurer’s position, said, “The provision
that the policies give coverage for occurrences that cause injury, read
with the provision that the policies apply only to personal injury,
sickness or disease… which occurs during the policy period, clearly
supports the court’s conclusion that coverage is triggered by injury in
fact. [The insurer’s] construction of injury as manifestation of injury is
inconsistent with this language. Some types of injury to the body
occur prior to the appearance of any symptoms; thus, the
manifestation of the injury may well occur after the injury itself. There
is no language in the policies that purports to limit coverage only to
injuries that become apparent during the policy period, regardless of
when the injury actually occurred.” It was further clarified that the
court found no requirement that the injury be diagnosable during the
policy period, since the injury may have occurred but been
unapparent until after the policy period. The court also rejected the
insurer’s view that it should not be liable for any injuries that occurred
during the policy period if the exposure that caused the injury duringthe policy period continued after the policy period, reasoning that an
injury occurring during the policy period could not have been caused
by the subsequent exposure.
The court also discounted the insured’s position, stating, “[The
insured’s] contentions that exposure alone is sufficient to trigger
coverage are likewise contrary to the plain language of the policies.
Injury cannot be read as the equivalent of exposure, because the
policy contemplates injury caused by exposure; since a cause
normally precedes its effect, it is plain that an injury could occur
during the policy period, although the exposure that caused it
preceded that period.”
Additional Insureds
The CGL coverage form has a Who Is an Insured section in which
it describes “an insured” to whom the provisions of the CGL form
apply. However, that section does not deal with entities known as
“additional insureds,” those that are added as insureds to the CGL
form by way of endorsements, or modifiers of the standard coverage
form.
Some of these endorsements can be attached to the named
insured’s CGL form at no additional charge; others result in additional
premium for the named insured. The endorsement can be a standard
form—for example, the Insurance Services Office (ISO) CG 20 15 04
13, Additional Insured—Vendors Endorsement; or a blanket
automatic endorsement, such as the endorsements for Additional
Insured—Owners, Lessees or Contractors: CG 20 33 04 13 when
the additional insured has a direct contract with the named insured, or
CG 20 38 04 13 when the additional insured does not have a direct
contract with the named insured.(What appears to be more popular in usage than standard ISO
additional insured endorsements are independently filed
endorsements of admitted insurers and manuscript endorsements.
Many of these endorsements also use a combination of ISO wording
and the insurers’ own verbiage. The red flag, to the extent the insurer
provides a warning, is the phrase at the endorsement’s bottom page
reading: “Includes copyrighted material of the Insurance Service
Office, Inc. with permission.” Some of these endorsements,
particularly those issued by excess and surplus lines insurers, provide
no red flag warning, despite using ISO wording.)
The additional insured endorsement, furthermore, can be simple,
like the two-sentence CG 20 02, Additional Insured—Club Members;
or more verbose one, like the two-page CG 20 10 04 13, Additional
Insured, Owners, Lessees or Contractors—S cheduled Person or
Organization.
But regardless of the length or format of an additional insured
endorsement, an insured should realize that a decision to make some
entity an additional insured on a general liability policy should not be
dismissed as just a simple business decision that has no real
consequences; there can be legal and financial consequences arising
from that decision. After all, the insured is sharing liability insurance
with another entity and is more often than not paying the insurer to
extend that insurance to apply to sums that the additional insured
becomes legally obligated to pay as damages.
Named insureds under a CGL form should also take note that the
limits of insurance paid out for claims are shared with additional
insureds. For example, if the general aggregate limit on a named
insured’s CGL policy is $500,000, that amount is the most the insurer
will pay regardless of the existence of additional insureds on the
policy. And, any losses paid on behalf of an additional insured will
decrease the aggregate amount available to the named insured.In connection with this point, named insureds need to know that
experience modification factors that may lower or increase the policy
premium can be affected by the losses and claims of the additional
insureds. If the named insured has a spotless loss history, but the
insurer has paid out tens of thousands of dollars for claims against an
additional insured, chances are that the premium for which the named
insured is responsible will be higher at the next renewal date.
Premiums and sums paid as damages are not the only areas
under a CGL form where named insureds and additional insureds
relate. The CGL forms consider the named insured (using the terms
“you” and “yours”) and (additional) insureds as connected, yet distinct
entities. Both are covered by insuring agreements and both are
touched by exclusions and conditions. Note, however, that there are
parts of the CGL form that apply only to the named insured, and
parts that apply to all insureds, including additional insureds. For
example, when an insuring agreement or an exclusion or a condition
or definition uses the word “you” or “your,” only the named insured is
the affected party, not the additional insured. Another example is the
medical payments insuring agreement—it applies only for the named
insured, not additional insureds.
Also, even though there is a clear distinction between a named
insured (you or your) and an additional insured, it is still a source of
confusion for some. For example, when an additional insured’s name
appears on a scheduled endorsement, that person has sometimes
been referred to as an additional named insured. This, of course, is
incorrect because the only ones who should be considered additional
named insureds are named insureds that are listed on an
endorsement and are, in addition to the first named insured, shown
on the policy declarations. In fact, with the realization that some
policies may include more than one named insured, standard CGL
forms in 1985/86 began to incorporate the use of the term “first
named insured” in the policy conditions to make clear who is to be
given notice. However, even this step taken by insurers usingstandard forms does not guarantee situations that are free from
problems.
A case in point is Kotlar v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 100 Cal. Rptr.
2d 246 (Ct. App.2d Dist. Div. 7, 2000), involving a landlord and tenant
relationship. The tenant not only agreed to add the landlord as an
additional insured to its CGL policy but also to show proof of this
status through the issuance of a certificate of insurance. Sometime
prior to the policy’s normal expiration, it was cancelled for
nonpayment of premium. However, the landlord was not given notice
and, in fact, did not learn of the policy’s early cancellation until after
someone fell on the premises and named the landlord as a
defendant. When the landlord’s tender of defense was refused by the
tenant’s former insurer, the landlord filed suit against the insurer and
the tenant’s insurance broker.
The insurer maintained it owed no duty to notify the additional
insured of the cancellation under the insurance certificate. This
certificate contained a provision in which the insurer promised it would
endeavor to give the certificate holder and insured thirty days’
advance notice of cancellation. The state’s insurance code, on the
other hand, provided in part, that notice of cancellation “shall be in
writing and shall be delivered or mailed to … the named insured at
the mailing address shown in the policy.” The insurer pointed out that
the statute required notice only to the named insured, explaining that
the article “the” was singular and only referred to a single person or
entity. The named insured to whom notice was owed, the insurer
said, was the policy’s first named insured. The court, however, was
not persuaded by the insurer’s argument, stating that the statute was
not limited to a single named insured, but applied to all insureds
named in the policy, including the landlord. The court also stated that
the statute, requiring notice of cancellation to all insureds, was
supported by public policy.Note that while the CGL policy of the named insured will provide
liability coverage for an additional insured, the CGL policy will not act
as a guarantor for the named insured’s adding the additional insured
onto the policy. If the named insured is required, or volunteers, to list
a party as an additional insured on the named insured’s CGL form,
but then does not follow through with the listing, the CGL form will not
just automatically provide coverage for the additional insured. Further,
the provisions of the CGL form will give no coverage to the named
insured if the jilted additional insured should sue for that lack of follow
through; this is a breach of a contractual agreement—either written or
verbal—and the CGL form does not apply to the upholding of
performance agreements.
The foregoing does not mean that coverage is never provided to a
person or entity that is shown on the certificate as an additional
insured but not listed on the policy. It has happened in at least two
situations where entities have been given additional insured status
despite the absence of endorsement to the named insured’s policy—
and for good reason. Despite the disclaimers, the certificate holders
were provided additional insured because the certificate would have
otherwise served to their detriment for relying on it. Thus, the
certificates controlled over the terms of the policy. These two cases
are Sumitomo Marine & Fire Ins. Co. v. Southern Guar. and
Columbia National Ins. Co., 337 F.Supp.2d 1339 (2004), and Marlin
v. Wetzel County Board of Education, 569 S.E.2d 462 (2002).
If the insurer is going to provide liability coverage for an additional
insured through an endorsement to a CGL form, the insurer must also
live up to the duty to defend. After all, the insurer states that it has
“the right and duty to defend the insured against any suit seeking …
damages.” This statement obviously includes an additional insured
within its scope. However, the duty to defend is limited by the
declaration that “we will have no duty to defend the insured against
any suit seeking damages … to which this insurance does not apply.”
So, for example, if an exclusion on the CGL form clearly applies tothe named insured and the additional insured, there is no duty to
defend on the part of the insurer.
Note that some additional insured endorsements make the
designated entity an insured for liability “arising out of” the product,
work or operations. However, it is no longer the majority of
endorsements that are worded that way. What changed matters
when the courts decided that this wording was broad enough to give
the additional insured coverage for its sole negligence, something
insurers did not want to give in all instances. This reason is clear
when one explores the meaning of the phrase “arising out of.”
Some insurers would read the phrase very narrowly, limiting an
additional insured’s role as an insured only to vicarious liability—that
is, no coverage for any negligence of the additional insured that is
independent of the activities of the named insured. Put another way,
the liability of the additional insured flows only from the liability of the
named insured. Others would say “arising out of” deserves a broader
interpretation—so broad that the additional insured’s own activities
could lead to liability coverage under the named insured’s CGL form.
Put another way, if the activities of the additional insured (instead of
the named insured) cause injury to someone, the named insured’s
CGL form will apply to a claim as long as there is some connection
between the additional insured’s activities and the named insured’s
operations or premises.
As usual in such circumstances, the courts will provide the
definitive interpretation on a case by case basis. Note that, at this
time, most courts are not buying the more narrow vicarious liability
only argument. Following are some examples of the judicial
viewpoints.
In Shell Oil Co. v. AC&S, Inc., 649 N.E.2d 946 (Ill. App. 1995),
the court was faced with interpreting the “arising out of” phrase andchose the broad viewpoint. In the case, Shell Oil had filed a
declaratory judgment action to see if the defendant and its insurers
had a duty to defend in a lawsuit by an employee of AC&S for injuries
sustained while working on Shell’s premises. The lower court sided
with Shell and the appeals court agreed. The appeals court said that
the “key language for determining potential coverage and the duty to
defend is the phrase ‘arising out of,’ and it means originating from,
having its origin in, growing out of, or flowing from. The injuries arose
from operations of AC&S on Shell’s premises, and the injuries would
not have occurred but for the employment and presence of the injured
worker on Shell’s premises.” Thus, the policy covered any liability that
would not have occurred, but for the operations of the named insured.
In Hormel Foods Corp. v. Northbrook Prop. and Cas. Ins. Co.,
938 F. Supp. 555 (D. Minn. 1996), the court looked over an additional
insured endorsement and offered a compelling argument in favor of
the broad interpretation of the “arising out of” phrase. In that case,
Hormel sued in a declaratory judgment action over the duty to defend
due to a death at a hog processing plant, and the resultant lawsuit.
Hormel was added as an additional insured on the general liability
policy of Quality Pork Products (QPP) for liability “arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, and use of” leased premises. When
someone was killed by a machine on the premises and Hormel was
sued, Hormel sought protection from the liability policy of QPP. QPP’s
insurer, Northbrook, denied coverage and said the additional insured
provision only protects Hormel from negligence by QPP, that is,
vicarious liability. The district court disagreed and said “if there is a
causal relationship between the place covered by insurance and acts
giving rise to legal liability, the liability is covered. The machine was
so intimately and necessarily intertwined with the operations as to
make the injuries flowing from it attributable to the ownership,
maintenance, or use of the facility.” Put another way, the term “arising
out of” requires only a causal connection; it does not require
proximate cause.On the other hand, in Harbor Ins. Co. v. Lewis, 562 F. Supp. 800
(D.C. Pa. 1983), the court wrote that “by providing additional insured
endorsements, the insurer is only insuring additional insureds against
vicarious liability for acts of the named insured.” However, note that
this decision was clarified in Philadelphia Electric Co. v. Nationwide
Mut. Ins. Co., 721 F. Supp. 740 (E.D. Pa. 1989) when that same
court stated that “the Harbor case did not articulate a rule of law
limiting the interest of additional insureds to vicarious liability.” What
the Harbor case did show was that contract language—the words
and phrases on the additional insured endorsement—was crucial in
interpreting the extent of coverage for an additional insured. In other
words, if an insurer wants to limit coverage for an additional insured
to vicarious liability only, that intent has to be written into the
endorsement (as was done in the Harbor case); otherwise, the
additional insured endorsement giving coverage to an additional
insured for injuries “arising out of” the ownership of a premises or the
operations performed by an insured will be seen as extending beyond
mere vicarious liability to include liability for the negligence of the
additional insured itself (as long as there is some causal connection
between the claimed injuries and that negligence).
An issue that often arises with the presence of additional insureds
is the relevance of certificates of insurance.
Sometimes, the additional insured may receive only a certificate of
insurance showing that it has been named as an additional insured on
the named insured’s policy. That certificate may show some policy
numbers and the name of an insurance company, but it is no
guarantee that the additional insured has the coverage it wishes or
requires. So, the additional insured should insist on a certificate of
insurance and a copy of the policy and the additional insured
endorsement, and then read and compare the certificate with the
policy and endorsement.A certificate of insurance will list the policy period. However, this
will not help the additional insured if the named insured cancels the
policy or has it cancelled through nonpayment of premium.
Cancellation notice goes to the first named insured and not the
additional insured. So, the additional insured needs some mechanism
beyond a certificate of insurance to assure itself that actual coverage
exists when it is needed.
The wording on a certificate of insurance may contradict the
wording or the intent of the insurance policy. The terms of the policy
should prevail over those on a certificate; but for this to be the case,
the insurer has to make it clear to the additional insured that the
certificate is not an insurance policy, and that any coverage granted is
done so through the policy and the additional insured endorsement. If
this is not clear and unambiguous, a case could be made that the
language on the certificate gives the additional insured more
coverage than the insurer had intended. As an example of this, see
International Ampitheatre Company v. Vanguard Underwriters
Insurance Company, 532 N.E.2d 493 (Ill. App. 1988). In that case,
the court found terms on a certificate of insurance ambiguous in
relation to just what the policy covered and what it excluded, and so
the insurer ended up covering a claim it had intended to exclude. For
an example of a court’s opinion as to what constitutes unambiguous
wording on a certificate of insurance, see Pekin Insurance Company
v. American Country Insurance Company, 572 N.E.2d 1112 (Ill. App.
1991). The wording on the certificate of insurance in that case was
as follows: “This certificate is issued as a matter of information only
and confers no rights upon the certificate holder. This certificate does
not amend, extend, or alter the coverage afforded by the policies
below. The insurance afforded by the policies described herein is
subject to all the terms, exclusions, and conditions of such policies.”
The court in the Pekin case said that this was a clear showing that
the certificate was not part of the policy and conveyed no rights to
the certificate holder.Another case to consider is United Stationers Supply Company v.
Zurich American Insurance Company, 896 N.E.2d 425 (2008). In this
case, the Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division, ruled
that, where the certificate of insurance refers to the policy and
expressly disclaims any coverage other than that contained in the
policy itself, the policy should govern the extent and terms of the
coverage.
Another issue that can arise with additional insureds concerns the
other insurance clause that is on the CGL forms, with its question of
primary insurance versus excess insurance. When an entity is named
as an additional insured on someone’s general liability policy, is that
policy primary or excess insurance for the additional insured? The
terms of the other insurance clause in the CGL form have to be
reviewed for an answer to the primary/excess question.
Language in the other insurance clause of the standard CGL form
starts off with “if other valid and collectible insurance is available to
the insured”. So, the discussion of whether the general liability
insurance is primary or excess is based on the assumption that there
is other valid and collectible insurance; in other words, the additional
insured has his or her own general liability policy as well as the other
general liability policy on which he or she has been named as an
additional insured.
Assuming this point, the other insurance clause then states that
“this insurance is primary except when b. (excess insurance
paragraph) applies”; the excess insurance paragraph lists several
specific examples of when “this insurance” is excess. However, the
example that is most relevant to an additional insured states that “this
insurance is excess over any other primary insurance available to you
covering liability for damages arising out of the premises or
operations, or the products and completed operations, for which you
have been added as an additional insured by attachment of an
endorsement”. In other words, the additional insured’s own generalliability policy is declaring it is excess coverage over that general
liability policy on which he or she has been listed as an additional
insured. It can thus be said at this time that, if both the additional
insured’s CGL form and the named insured’s CGL form have that
paragraph in the other insurance clause, then the additional insured
endorsement has attempted to make the additional insured a primary
insured on the liability policy to which the endorsement has been
attached; the additional insured’s own CGL form is excess coverage.
Litigation notwithstanding, requests to add additional insured to
general liability policies are one of the most common occurrences in
the daily insurance routine. Great thought, then, should go into the
reason for the request, and the nature of the entity making the
request. In other words, those who want to be additional insureds
cannot simply ask to obtain that coverage and expect to receive
protection in time of need. There are too many different kinds of
endorsements, most of which in use today are either manuscript or
independently filed ones. Asking simply for an additional insured
endorsement and nothing more is like shooting in the dark.
Remember that the requirement to add an additional insured to
one party’s insurance policy is a performance obligation. It requires
that one of the parties do something. Failure to comply with the
requirement is a breach of contract that is not insurable by a general
liability policy. Since breach of contract generally isn’t covered by any
general liability insurance that a party carries, that party may find
itself on its own to defend any action arising from failing to another
party as an additional insured.
This is the same type of thing as failing to live up to other terms of
the contract—failing to pay the rent, failing to manufacture the goods
in a certain way, or failing to complete a job in a certain time frame.
They also are breaches of contract that aren’t covered by general
liability insurance.In addition to thinking of indemnification clauses and additional
insured requirements in contracts as separate items, there are other
areas that should be considered before agreeing to name an
additional insured on a liability policy. Among them are:
Direct Access to the Policy
Additional insureds may be given direct access to the named
insured’s policy for both defense and settlement, a fact that often is
overlooked in the haste to negotiate the terms of a contract. An
additional insured has the same rights under the policy as other
“insureds”. They can turn claims arising from additional insured
activities directly over to the insurance carrier without consulting with
the named insured. That consultation should occur when the decision
is made to name the company an additional insured.
Right to Defense
In addition to paying judgments, the additional insured coverage
provides defense for claims to which the coverage applies. This
means that the insurance carrier does have to defend the additional
insured as well as the named insured if both are involved in the same
claim. This could require separate defense strategies and sets of
counsel, especially if the interests of the named and additional
insureds conflict.
The right to defense is the same for both the named and
additional insureds. Defense is provided when there appears to be
coverage under the policy and coverage limits still are available.
Dilution of Limits
Judgments against both parties will be paid from the same set of
limits. Every time an additional insured is added to a policy thecoverage limits are diluted. Instead of the named insured carrying a
dedicated $1,000,000 of coverage for each occurrence, it is carrying
$1,000,000 per occurrence that it may have to share with all
additional insureds that are involved in the claim. This sometimes
comes as a shock to the named insured after the claim is turned over
to the insurance carrier.
Is the Request Reasonable?
At times it seems as if some companies want to be added as
additional insureds as a matter of routine. There should be a
legitimate reason behind the request; the coverage should not be
granted just because a company asks for it. Often, a party that is in
the superior bargaining position automatically requests additional
insured status as part of its standard requirements. It is worthwhile to
question the request if a logical reason for it is not evident.
Companies often will reconsider in the face of legitimate questions.
The additional insurance requirement should be viewed as an area of
negotiation and not a pre-set requirement.
Proper Flow of Coverage
In general, the party that has control over the work or property
provides the primary insurance. As examples, the tenant who is
occupying the building usually adds the building owner as additional
insured. The manufacturer that is producing the product usually
names the vendor as additional insured. The subcontractor who is
installing the equipment usually names the contractor or owner as
additional insured.
There are exceptions to this coverage hierarchy. However, it is
worthwhile to think through the relationship before automatically
agreeing to provide additional insured status.Control of Coverage
The additional insured is at the mercy of the named insured in
regard to scope and continuation of coverage. The evidence of
additional insured status usually takes the form of a certificate of
insurance or a policy endorsement. An additional insured rarely has
the opportunity to review the named insured’s entire policy and claims
history. Aggregate limits may be impaired; limiting endorsements may
be attached. Additional insureds probably will not be notified if the
policy is canceled. All of these factors could add up to problems
when claims arise and the additional insured turns to the named
insured’s policy for protection.
Other Insurance
An additional insured may have access to two policies that apply
to a claim: the policy on which it is named an additional insured and
the policy that covers its general business activities. The company
usually wants the policy on which it is an additional insured to be
primary when both policies apply. There may be a conflict, however,
between the other insurance clauses of the two policies. This could
occur if they have identical other insurance clauses or if the clauses
contradict one another. With either of these situations, the policies
both may contribute to the loss on a pro-rata basis or a court could
decide which is primary, which defeats the intention of the insureds.
In order to avoid this problem, the named insured’s policy should
be amended with the primary and noncontributory—other insurance
condition endorsement, CG 20 01 that was newly introduced by ISO
in 2013. If this is difficult to negotiate, the additional insured could ask
that its commercial general liability policy be amended to apply as
excess to other coverage to which the additional insured
endorsement is to apply. Either one of these methods should result ingiving the additional insured primary coverage, which, by the way, has
always been the intent anyway.
Unintended Coverage
The additional insured endorsement should limit the coverage to
the extent of the relationship between the named and additional
insureds. Standard ISO endorsements attempt to limit it to the
applicable relationship, and care should be taken to do the same with
additional insured endorsements that are manuscripted for special
situations. The coverage should be limited to the specific work being
performed, the specific contract requiring the coverage, or the
specific relationship being insured (such as tenant-landlord). There
are some who believe that the additional insured may be able to tap
into the named insured’s policy for broader coverage than was
intended if the additional insured endorsement is not limited in this
way.
Restrictions also should be placed on the amount and length of
coverage being provided by the endorsement or more coverage might
be provided than was intended. If only $1,000,000 of general liability
coverage is required for the additional insured, the endorsement
should reflect only that amount of coverage. In other words, the
extent of the additional insured coverage that is provided should be
consistent with the breadth of the indemnification clause.
Property Damage
The commercial general liability (CGL) forms will pay those sums
that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages
because of property damage. The CGL forms define property
damage, but that has not stopped legal disputes centered around the
issue of what constitutes property damage for purposes of liability
insurance coverage.Property damage is defined on the CGL form as: physical injury to
tangible property, including all resulting loss of use of that property;
and loss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured. The
loss of use is deemed to occur at the time of the physical injury (or
occurrence, when there is no physical injury) that caused it.
There are several things to note about this definition.
Property damage under a CGL form pertains to tangible property,
that is, property that can be touched, property that is physical and
material. For example: a book is tangible property, an idea is not; a
computer is tangible property, the information in the computer is not;
a retail store building is tangible property, goodwill engendered by
good retail business is not. For property damage to occur, the
property has to have an alteration in appearance, shape, color, or
some other material dimension, and that can only occur in property
that is tangible.
There has been speculation (and some judicial opinion) that
computer data is tangible property since it can be put on a disk,
edited, and transferred from one person to another. However, in an
effort to end that course of thought, the current CGL form specifically
states that “for the purpose of this insurance, electronic data is not
tangible property.” Electronic data includes information, facts, or
programs stored as or on, created or used on, or transmitted to or
from computer software. Also, the current CGL form has an exclusion
applying to damages arising out of the loss of, loss of use of,
damage to, corruption of, inability to access, or inability to manipulate
electronic data. This should clear up the issue of whether computer
software data is tangible property that could be covered as property
damage under a CGL form, although whether this definition and
exclusion will satisfy courts as the information age progresses
remains to be seen.Another notable point is that property damage includes loss of use
of tangible property, even if there is no physical injury to the property.
If physical injury to tangible property occurs, then the loss of use of
that property is automatically included within the definition of property
damage. For example, if the insured negligently crashes his mobile
equipment into someone’s retail store, the physical injury to the store
is property damage covered under the CGL form, and the resulting
loss of use of that store by the owner is also property damage
covered under the CGL form. But, what if the loss of use of the
tangible property occurs when there is no actual physical damage to
the property? This part of the definition can be more troublesome
than the first part in that different courts can interpret “loss of use”
differently. Examine the following cases for some examples.
In Hendrickson v. Zurich American Insurance Company, 72 Cal.
App.4th 1084 (1st Dist. 1999), an insured commercial nursery
brought suit against its insurer for breach of the duty to defend in a
case where the insured was sued by growers over defective plants
that failed to produce a full crop; the plaintiffs in the complaint against
the insured alleged that they were damaged by a loss of use of
tangible property due to the defective plants that the insured sold to
them. The court of appeals decided that the loss of use suffered by
the growers did constitute property damage as defined on the
insured’s CGL form even though their land was not physically injured.
The court found that the growers” complaint could be reasonably
construed as alleging that, as a result of the insured’s negligent
delivery of defective plants, the growers suffered a loss of strawberry
production, and thereby a loss of use of their land. The court
concluded by saying that loss of profits and diminution in property
value allegedly suffered by the growers in this case as a result of the
defective plants were not solely economic losses—w hich are outside
covered property damage in liability policies—but are damages
because of property damage, and constituted alternative measures of
property damage.Hartzell Industries, Inc. v. Federal Insurance Company, 168 F.
Supp. 2d 789 (S.D. Ohio 2001) is a case where the insured brought
an action against the insurer, seeking indemnification of its liability in
an underlying action. Hartzell supplied the Allegheny Power Company
with seven roof fans to cool its boiler house. The propellers on one of
the fans disintegrated and Allegheny shut down all the fans as a
precaution; this led to lost worker productivity due to the hot work
environment attributable to the lack of functioning roof fans. The
power company filed a lawsuit against Hartzell for damages, and
Hartzell tendered the claim to Federal. Then, the dispute over
coverage began.
Hartzell said that there was a property damage claim because
Allegheny lost the use of tangible property—its boiler house—even
though that tangible property was not physically injured. Federal
countered that Allegheny did not lose the use of its boiler house as a
result of the fan failure, but merely lost the use of the fans; and, since
the fans were the only tangible property that could not be used, the
insurer said that Hartzell could not establish property damage based
on the loss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured.
Federal also said that Allegheny’s alleged damages resulting from
reduced worker productivity due to heat in the boiler house are purely
economic losses which do not constitute the loss of use of tangible
property. The court found Federal’s arguments to be unpersuasive.
The district court noted that Allegheny’s complaint against Hartzell
was that its boiler house became too hot as a result of the inability to
use Hartzell’s roof fans. This, the court found, qualified as a covered
loss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured. The
boiler house became less useful because the fans were turned off
and this resulted in a loss of productivity for Allegheny. This loss of
use constituted property damage as defined on the CGL form.
Another case is American Mercury Insurance Group v. Urban,
2001 WL 1723734 (D. Kan. 2001). (Note that this case is notreported in F.Supp.2d.) This was a declaratory judgment action to
determine whether American Mercury Insurance Group had a duty to
defend and indemnify its insured, Meadows General Contracting.
Urban purchased a wet bin and a grain dryer and arranged with
Meadows to construct and install these and other parts and
components of Urban’s grain handling facility. Meadows started the
work but could not complete it, so Urban hired another construction
company to do that. After a while, Urban put 5,000 to 6,000 bushels
of shelled corn into the facility, but the concrete pad upon which the
wet bin sat and which was poured by Meadows settled and the wet
bin tilted. Urban filed a lawsuit against Meadows alleging that the
unexpected, sudden and accidental tilting of the wet bin resulted in his
being able to fill the wet bin to only one-third of its capacity, which
meant that the grain handling facility was able to operate at only one-
third capacity; in other words, the loss of use of the wet bin damaged
Urban’s grain handling facilities as a whole. Urban charged that the
tilting was caused by Meadow’s inadequate and negligent design of
the concrete pad.
Meadows tendered the lawsuit to its insurer, but American
Mercury filed a declaratory judgment action, saying that Meadows’
policy did not cover claims made by Urban. Urban asserted that the
damages he claimed related to the partial loss of use and the
resultant diminished value of his entire grain handling facility, and that
this was property damage as defined on Meadows policy. This court,
however, found that the definition of property damage did not extend
coverage to intangible injuries such as Urban’s partial loss of use of
his business. In other words, loss of use of tangible property that is
not physically injured does not describe the loss that Urban suffered
in this instance. Judgment was entered in favor of the insurer.
In Advanced Network, Inc. v. Peerless Insurance Company, 119
Cal.Rptr.3d 17 (2011), the Court of Appeal, Fourth District, Division 1,
California held that the permanent loss of cash was not covered
under the CGL form’s loss of use provision. In this case, the servicerof cash distribution machines in credit unions brought an action
against its commercial general liability insurer for breach of contract
after the insurer denied coverage for a claim arising out of a theft of
cash by the servicer’s employee from a credit union client. The
appeals court ruled that this action was not for the “loss of use” of the
cash, but rather was for the permanent “loss” of the cash (the
property) and its replacement value; thus, this claim was not covered
under the loss of use section of the definition of property damage as
claimed by the insured. The court noted that the terms “loss of use”
and “loss” are not interchangeable for liability insurance purposes.
These cases show that “loss of use”, when there is no physical
injury to tangible property, can be subject to a case by case judicial
interpretation. However, logic would seem to say that if the claimant
cannot use his tangible property because of the negligence of the
insured, that action can sometimes can be seen as within the bounds
of the definition of property damage on the CGL form.
One final point to note about the property damage definition: the
loss of use is deemed to occur at the time of the physical injury or
occurrence that caused it; this pertains to which policy applies to a
property damage loss.
Now, there is general agreement that property damage occurs at
the time the damage is discovered or when it has manifested itself.
For example, see Wrecking Corporation of America, Virginia, Inc. v.
Insurance Company of North America, 574 A.2d 1348 (D.C. 1990);
and see Travelers Insurance Company v. Eljer Mfg., Inc., 757
N.E.2d 481 (Ill. 2001). However, what if the property damage occurs
in a policy period that ends in 2001, for example, but the actual loss
of use of the property because of the damage occurs in 2002, after a
new policy period has begun? Which policy should cover the loss of
use? Since the definition on the CGL form now says that the loss of
use occurs at the time of the physical injury or occurrence that
caused it, the answer is simple: the policy in force at the time theproperty damage occurs also applies to any resulting loss of use, no
matter when that loss of use occurs.
An example of this is Mitchell, Best, & Visnic, Inc. v. Travelers
Property Casualty Corp., 121 F. Supp. 2d 848 (D. Maryland 2000). In
that case, an insured builder of custom homes sued its insurer,
seeking coverage for claims by home purchasers who alleged
negligent misrepresentations on the part of the insured. One of the
defenses of Travelers was that the claimed damages did not occur
during the policy period. Travelers” policy with Mitchell ran from
January 1, 1998 through January 1, 1999, and the alleged
misrepresentations by the insured did occur during that time.
However, Travelers argued that the only real damages that may
occur would do so in the future, if the houses under construction need
to be modified and repaired; thus, any damages would occur outside
the policy period. The district court did not agree.
The court reviewed the policy and said that the definition of
property damage states clearly that the loss must occur at the time
of the occurrence that caused it; in order for the insured to be
covered, the occurrence must take place during the coverage period.
The court found that the occurrence was the alleged negligent
misrepresentation by the insured. This took place during the policy
period, and any damages from this alleged misrepresentation
occurred during the policy period, even though any costs resulting
from the misrepresentation—that is, modification of homes to satisfy
restrictive covenants—w ould be incurred in some future time outside
the policy period.
Also see Harford County v. Harford Mutual Insurance Company,
327 Md. 418 (1992) wherein the Court of Appeals, Maryland, stated
that “coverage under the policies could be triggered during a policy
period earlier than discovery or manifestation of the damage when
the damage occurred within the meaning of the policies”.The question of whether “loss of use of tangible property that is
not physically injured” is property damage often comes into play when
the loss is caused by conversion, theft, or disappearance. After all, if
some property of the claimant is missing (that is, not actually
physically injured), it cannot be used. But, there can be side issues
with these three actions that affect the answer of whether they are
property damage and are covered by the CGL form.
For example, conversion is certainly an action that deprives the
owner of his property, but does it fit the definition of property damage
under the terms of the CGL form? A good discussion of this question
can be found in Collin v. American Empire Insurance Company, 21
Cal. App.4th 787 (Cal. App. 1994). This was a case where Collin
owned a house which he leased to Gordon. Gordon hired Southwest
Design to do some remodeling work without informing Collin. The
remodeling work required the removal of some of the household
items that belonged to Collin. These items were stored in a
warehouse, but when Collin went to retrieve the property, it was
gone. Collin sued the remodeling company, alleging conversion of
personal property. Collin attained a judgment against Southwest
Design and then commenced this action against American Empire to
satisfy the judgment. The trial court ruled that the conversion of the
personal property was an accident covered by the policy, and the
insurer appealed.
The appeals court conducted an extensive review of the legal
meaning of conversion and its relation to property damage, and
reversed the trial court’s decision. The appeals court noted that
virtually every court to consider the question has agreed that
conversion of property is not property damage. The court accepted
the idea that conversion is not property damage, but rather is the
taking or deprivation of property. The court then added that loss of
use of property is different from loss of property in that loss of use
refers to the rental value of similar property that the owner can hirefor use during the period when he is deprived of the use of his own
property.
This decision can be seen as somewhat confusing and, perhaps
hairsplitting, but there was another part to the court’s decision that is
more to the point of whether the CGL form covers conversion as a
property damage loss. Conversion does result in the owner being
deprived of his property and thus, deprived of the use of that
property, but the court also held that conversion is an intentional tort.
In order to establish a conversion, one must show an intent to
exercise ownership over property that belongs to another; in other
words, conversion is an expected or intended injury and not an
occurrence or accident. This means that even if conversion were to
be considered property damage as defined on the CGL form, the
conversion is not caused by an occurrence and so, the CGL form
would not apply to a property damage claim.
For another example of this point, see American Casualty
Company of Reading, Pennsylvania v. Amsouth Bank, 2002 WL
1397263 (W.D. Tenn.). (Note that this case is not reported in
F.Supp.2d.)
Note also, in the Advanced Network case mentioned previously,
the court said that “insurance coverage for loss of use does not apply
to an underlying action in which the claimant seeks only the
replacement value of converted property”.
Theft is similar to conversion in that it requires an intent to deprive
the owner of some property of the possession, use, or benefit of that
property. Theft would result in an expected or intended injury and so,
liability for the loss of use of the stolen property would not be covered
by the CGL form.Of course, this denial of coverage based on the expected or
intended exclusion is based on the insured having this expectation or
intention. If the insured is not the party that has converted or stolen
the property, then the exclusion would not apply. The insured still has
to be held legally obligated to pay the damages because of property
damage for the CGL form to apply, but if the insured is not the one
that intends or expects the injury, the exclusion does not come into
play.
Disappearance of property is another matter. Disappearance of
property does not automatically mean there was an intent to deprive
the owner of his possession and use; the property could have been
misplaced or mistakenly thrown out. Disappearance of property does
result in the loss of use of that property by its owner, so the definition
of property damage is met and, if the insured is found legally liable
for that loss (property damage), the CGL form can apply. Now, there
are exclusions that may apply to prevent coverage—such as, the
expected or intended exclusion, the damage to property exclusion,
and the impaired property exclusion—, but the insurer has the duty to
prove that the exclusion applies. For example, the insured motel locks
the customer’s jewels in the motel vault for safekeeping. When the
customer wants the jewels back, it is discovered that they are
missing. The insured is legally liable for the missing jewels (property
damage as loss of use), but the insurer can say that the care,
custody, or control exclusion (j.4) applies and there is no coverage.
But, if no exclusion can be shown to apply, the disappearance of the
jewels would be covered as property damage under the CGL form.
Diminution in value is another thing to consider when the meaning
of property damage is discussed.
The idea of diminution in value as property damage can be
complex. A purely economic loss—t hat is, a decline in value of the
property—is not property damage as defined on the CGL form. On
the other hand, a loss in the value of some property in that theproperty is made useless, can be seen as property damage. The
following case represents a thorough discussion of diminution in value
and its differing meanings.
In Wisconsin Label Corporation v. Northbrook Property &
Casualty Insurance Company, 607 N.W.2d 276 (Wisc. 2000), the
insured brought a declaratory judgment action against its insurer,
seeking coverage for claims in connection with its mislabeling of a
promotional package for a customer. The Wisconsin Supreme Court
decided that mislabeling of a client’s promotional products did not
result in any physical injury; that any diminution in value resulting when
the customer’s products were sold at the incorrect (lower) price did
not fall under the policy’s definition of property damage; and that
damages from the insured’s mislabeling did not result from loss of
use within the policy’s definition of property damage.
The United States District Court in Grennell Mutual Reinsurance
Company v. Wollak Construction, Inc., 2010 WL 4121906 (D.Minn.)
ruled that the argument that diminution in value was property damage
lacked legal or factual support. The court held that diminution in value
does not constitute property damage as defined in the general liability
policy in question in this case.
The Wisconsin Label Corporation case is noteworthy also
because, as part of the decision, the court discussed other cases
that had found that diminution in value constituted property damage,
why this was so, and why this case was different. The cases listed
are: Eljer Manufacturing, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company,
972 F.2d 805 (7th Cir. 1992); Sola Basic Industries, Inc. v. United
States Fidelity & Guaranty Company, 280 N.W.2d 211 (Wis. 1979);
and Hauenstein v. St. Paul-Mercury Indemnity Company, 65 N.W.2d
122 (Minn. 1954). (It should be noted that these cases dealt with a
definition of property damage on the general liability policy that has
since changed. The current definition requires actual physical injury totangible property or some actual loss of use of tangible property that
is not physically injured; the “loss of use” phrase was missing in the
definitions of property damage that the courts used in deciding these
cases.)
So today, a blanket statement that “diminution in value is not
property damage” is not accurate. It would be better to say that, for
diminution in value to be considered property damage, the “loss of
use” part of the property damage definition has to be met. A good
example of this point can be found in Vogel v. Russo, 613 N.W.2d
177 (Wis. 2000). (Note that this case has been overruled in part, but
not with reference to the diminution in value holding, in Insurance
Company of North America v. Cease Elec., Inc., 688 N.W.2d 462
[2004].) In the Vogel case, a follow-up to the Wisconsin Label
decision, the Wisconsin Supreme Court had to determine whether the
general liability policy provided coverage for diminution in value of a
home due to faulty workmanship. The court said it did not because
the plaintiffs never lost use of their home, and diminution in value—
even to the point of worthlessness—i s not the same as loss of use
under the terms of the insurance policy which, by its plain language,
contemplates some sort of loss of use in fact, not merely a reduction
in value.
One last note pertaining to property damage comes in relation to
the pollution exclusion in the CGL form.
The current CGL forms have a paragraph at the end of the
pollution exclusion declaring that the clean-up costs part of the
exclusion does not apply to liability for damages because of property
damage that the insured would have in the absence of any request or
demand or order for a clean-up. This points out a thin line between
paying for property damage for which the insured is liable and clean-
up efforts.It may be said that, if some property has suffered damage due to
pollution, it necessarily follows that the property damage has to be
cleaned up; and, since the pollution exclusion prohibits coverage for
pollution clean-up costs that means the CGL form of the insured will
not respond to a property damage claim. This is not always the case
under the terms of the current CGL forms. The wording noted in the
previous paragraph means that the pollution exclusion does not
prevent the CGL form from paying for property damage for which the
insured is legally liable. In other words, if the insured is liable for
property damage caused by pollution, and the exclusion does not
apply for whatever reason, the insurer will not deny coverage for
cleaning up the property damage by asserting that the process is
really a clean-up cost.
The distinction between paying for property damage and paying
clean-up costs has to be made on a case-by-case basis, but there
should be no confusion about whether the clean-up costs part of the
pollution exclusion prevents payment for property damage. If the
insured is liable for the damage and the exclusion does not apply, the
property damage costs will be paid.
Professional Liability and General Liability
Insurance
Professional liability insurance for hospitals, physicians, dentists,
other medical practitioners, and lawyers, and errors and omissions
insurance for the purveyors of a wide variety of professional services,
such as accountants, architects, engineers, and insurance agents or
brokers, are designed primarily for protection against liability that
may arise from rendering or failing to render services within the
context of the insured’s profession. These types of insurance are
designed for people who represent themselves to the public as
possessing special skills in their profession. Basically, the insuring
agreement of all these forms, standard and nonstandard, provides for
the payment on behalf of the insured of all sums that the insuredbecomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of injury
arising out of malpractice, error, or mistake of the insured, or of a
person for whose acts or omissions the insured is legally responsible
in conducting his or her profession.
Commercial general liability (CGL) insurance, on the other hand, is
designed to cover an insured’s liability stemming from exposures on
the insured’s premises or from the more concrete and physical
actions of the insured’s operations; liability stemming from the
insured’s products and completed operations can also be included in
the general liability area. The general liability insuring agreement
promises to pay on behalf of the insured all sums that the insured
shall become legally obligated to pay as damages because of bodily
injury or property damage caused by an occurrence.
The meaning of the term “professional services” is important, for it
influences borderline coverage and claim situations. Its meaning helps
to determine whether a certain act or service is in keeping with the
primary role of a professional and, therefore, rightfully within the
scope of professional liability insurance, or, looking at it from the
opposite viewpoint, whether the act or service is akin to a premises
and operations exposure and, therefore, a subject of general liability
insurance.
The number of actual and potential situations in which this issue
arises cannot be counted. The following are typical examples.
A registered nurse is employed by a sanatorium. She has her own
nurses professional liability policy and the sanatorium has its own
hospital professional liability and CGL policies. If the nurse fails to
see that the side rails of a patient’s bed are in place as ordered by
the sanatorium or one of its physicians and the patient is injured,
several complex questions may arise. If the sanatorium has its
professional liability policy with one insurer and its CGL policy with
another, which insurer is obligated to protect the sanatorium? Thepresence of the bed is clearly a premises exposure but is setting the
rails a routine operation or a professional act? If the nurse is sued,
will the insurer providing her nurses’ professional liability policy
respond? Suppose the sanatorium had included all of its employees
as additional insureds under its CGL policy, will this coverage protect
the nurse?
Another example is the architect who has E&O coverage and CGL
coverage with different insurers. If, while inspecting a construction
site with its owner, the architect steps on a board that injures the
owner, is the architect covered by the E&O policy or the CGL policy?
A final example concerns a hotel that also operates a sauna bath.
It has a CGL policy covering its operations. But because of the sauna
bath, there is a policy exclusion for bodily injury and property damage
due to the rendering of or failure to render any professional service. If
a hotel guest, following her doctor’s prescription and with the aid of a
hotel employee assigned to assist bathers, is injured while in the
bath, is the hotel protected under its CGL policy?
There is some judicial direction in trying to address these issues.
In Aker v. Sabatier, 200 So. 2d 94 (1967) a Louisiana appeals court
stated that “the term professional services means service performed
by one in the ordinary course of practice of his profession, on behalf
of another, pursuant to some agreement, express or implied, and for
which it could be reasonably expected some compensation would be
due”. In another case for a Louisiana appeals court, D’Antoni v. Sara
Mayo Hospital, 144 So. 2d 643 (1962), it was stated that “in
determining whether a particular act is of a professional nature, we
must look, not to the title of or the character of the party performing
the act, but to the act itself”. (Note that this case was overruled, but
on grounds other than professional versus general liability coverage;
the dicta pertaining to acts of a professional nature remains valid.)Also see, Food Pro International v. Farmers Insurance Exchange,
169 Cal.App.4th 976 (2009) wherein the Court of Appeal, Sixth
District, California stated that “for the purposes of a professional
services exclusion in a general liability policy, professional services
involve specialized knowledge, labor, or skill and the labor or skill
involved is predominately mental or intellectual”.
And see, Erie Insurance Group v. Alliance Environmental, 921
F.Supp. 537 (1996) wherein the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Indiana said “a professional services exclusion
should not be read so broadly as to exclude liability for any act taken
in the course of providing professional services, but should not be
read so narrowly as to transform the policy into a professional errors
and omissions policy. The focus should be on whether the claimant is
seeking to impose liability for acts taken in the course of providing
professional services and that drew upon a professional’s training,
skill, experience, or knowledge”.
In Bank of California, N.A. v. Opie, 663 F.2d 977 (1981), a
federal court tried to define the term “professional services”. The
court stated that “a professional obviously performs many tasks that
do not constitute professional services; to be considered a
professional service, the conduct must arise out of the insured’s
performance of his specialized vocation or profession. To take an
extreme example, an attorney’s failure to pay for office equipment
constitutes a breach of contract, not an omission in professional
services, regardless of how essential the equipment may be to the
attorney’s law practice. To be covered, the liability must arise out of
the special risks inherent in the practice of the profession”.
These statements are not the final word on the meaning of
professional services of course, but they can serve as a base upon
which to build a clearer understanding of just what the nature of a
professional service is, and, thus, help to distinguish between a
professional liability exposure and a general liability exposure.The following cases note that some courts focus primarily on the
service or act performed and whether it is of a professional nature.
In American Casualty Company v. Hartford Insurance Company,
479 So. 2d 577 (1985), the court decided that both the general
liability insurance policy and the professional liability insurance policy
applied to the claim. A patient fell and was injured while climbing onto
an EKG table. The patient’s doctor had ordered the EKG exam but
was not present when the patient tried to get on the table.
The question before the court was whether the injuries were due
to medical or nonmedical services. The court ruled that the general
liability insurance applied since the fall of and subsequent injury to the
patient were nonmedical in nature. The court further ruled that the
professional liability insurance also applied since the doctor failed to
furnish medical services to the patient properly, thereby causing
injury. In determining whether the particular act that caused an injury
here was of a professional nature or a nonprofessional nature, the
court looked to the act itself and saw both.
In Northern Insurance Co. of New York v. Superior Court for the
City and County of San Francisco, 154 Cal. Rptr. 198 (1979), an
insurer under a general liability policy was not obligated to defend an
insured doctor in a suit brought against him by a patient for the
doctor’s mistake in performing an abortion on the patient instead of
examining her for her pregnancy condition. The California court of
appeal held that this service came within the policy clause that
excluded coverage for bodily injury or property damage due to the
insured’s rendering of or failing to render any professional service.
The argument that coverage existed because the injury resulted from
an administrative error of the insured’s clerical employee was held by
the court to be without merit.It is undisputed, the court stated, that a physician has the
professional duty to identify correctly a surgical patient before
undertaking a particular procedure. That he utilizes the assistance of
a nonphysician in the performance of that duty cannot alter the
professional nature of the nondelegable duty. Thus, the court
concluded that the injury to his patient occurred during and as a direct
result of the performance of professional services.
In Danyo v. Argonaut Insurance Company, 464 A.2d 501 (1983),
an attorney brought suit against a doctor for loss of a contingent fee
as a result of the doctor’s failure to prepare a proper medical report
and to testify in court. The Pennsylvania superior court ruled that this
came within the coverage of professional liability insurance and not
general liability insurance. The terms of the professional liability policy
were held to be broad enough to include the type of loss suffered by
the attorney through the actions taken (or not taken) by the doctor.
When it comes to the negligent handling of equipment, see the
following cases. On the authority of these cases at least, professional
liability insurance is required in order to cover liability arising out of
defective or negligently adjusted equipment peculiar to professional
services—a physician’s examination table, dentist’s chair, etc.—
whether the act (or failure to act) proximately giving rise to a claim
was a “professional service” or not. Note that the case law is still
valid despite the age of the decisions.
Antles v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Co., 221 Cal.App.2d 438
(1963) involved an injury to a patient when a heat lamp used in
treatment became detached from the wall, fell on the treatment table,
and burned the patient’s back. In considering whether the defective
attachment of the lamp was a mechanical act or a professional
service, the court ruled that the crucial factor was whether the injuries
occurred “during the performance of professional services.” Since the
court found that the injury had been sustained in such a manner, there
was no coverage under the general liability policy. (For an oppositeholding in a case involving similar circumstances, see the Keepes
case, below.)
In Brockbank v. Travelers Insurance Co., 207 N.Y.S.2d 723
(1960), the insured operated a convalescent home and had a general
liability policy covering the operations. When a claim was made that a
nurse failed to adjust the sideboards of a patient’s bed, a New York
supreme court held that the alleged negligence constituted “nursing
service within the exclusion of malpractice and professional services
and was, therefore, not covered.
Knoor v. Commercial Casualty Insurance Co., 90 A.2d 387
(1952), involved an injury sustained when a customer in a beauty
parlor was struck by a piece of equipment. Although professional
services were not actually being performed at the time, the
Pennsylvania superior court held that liability for this accident was not
covered by a general liability policy that excluded “rendering of any
professional services.” The Washington supreme court held similarly
in Harris v. Fireman’s Fund Indemnity Co., 257 P.2d 221 (1953). This
case involved a judgment based on a defective osteopathic table.
Likewise, the Ohio supreme court in American Policyholders
Insurance Co. v. Michota, 103 N.E.2d 817 (1952), stated that
maintaining a treatment chair in a proper and safe condition for the
accommodation of patients was a service or duty directly connected
with the practice by the doctor of his profession as a chiropodist. A
patient had been injured when she proceeded to seat herself in a
metal hydraulic chair which suddenly rotated causing her to lose her
balance and fall to the floor. The court specifically held that the injury
was one “arising out of the practice of the insured’s profession” and
also constituted “an injury resulting from professional service
rendered or which should have been rendered.” The insured’s
professional liability insurer was obligated to defend and pay any
judgment rendered.Of course, any question that concerns itself with professional
versus nonprofessional acts is almost certainly resolved as a question
of fact. And, as the following three cases attest, certain acts will be
perceived as constituting simple negligence, rather than professional
incompetence.
This is precisely what the Louisiana court of appeal decided in the
previously mentioned case of D’Antoni v. Sara Mayo Hospital, 144
So. 2d 643 (1962). The claimant brought suit against the hospital and
its insurer for injuries sustained as the result of falling from her bed.
The insurer issued a CGL policy to the hospital that contained an
exclusion of coverage for malpractice, i.e., professional
incompetence. The court dismissed the action involving the hospital
(under the doctrine of charitable immunity) but rendered a verdict
against the insurer for the amount of the suit: $25,000.
The insurer argued on appeal that the failure to raise the patient’s
bed rails was malpractice and, therefore, excluded under the policy.
The court concluded, however, that this was negligence and not
malpractice. An opinion of the court was that the initial decision of the
patient’s physician to keep the rails raised may have involved
professional judgment, but once the order was issued, the
professional aspect of this situation was complete.
The argument in Keepes v. Doctors Convalescent Center, Inc.,
231 N.E.2d 274 (1967), also centered on the coverage of a general
liability policy with the professional services exclusion. While a child
was being prepared for a bath, a nurse’s aide left the room and the
child came in contact with a heating radiator and sustained burns. In
holding the injury covered under the general liability policy, the court
stated that the attendant, though a nurse’s aide, was working as a
maid.Where a claim gives sufficient notice that the alleged breach of
duty may encompass ordinary negligence as well as professional
malpractice, a general liability insurer has a contractual duty to furnish
defense and to provide insurance coverage in accordance with the
policy’s provisions. However, in so holding, the New York supreme
court, appellate division, in Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. v.
The Regent Nursing Home, 413 N.Y.S.2d 195 (1979), permitted the
general liability insurer to reserve its rights to limit coverage pursuant
to the policy’s malpractice and professional services exclusion. This
case involved an injury to a patient who fell from a chair at a nursing
home.
The following cases deal with the question of negligent employee
as opposed to professional deficiency.
In the case of Marx v. Hartford Accident and Casualty Indemnity
Co., 157 N.W.2d 870 (1968), the insured’s employee, in refilling a hot
water sterilizer, mistakenly filled the container with benzene instead of
water. The fumes eventually caused an explosion and fire that
damaged the building.
The insuring clause of the professional liability policy stated: “To
pay on behalf of the insured, all sums the insured shall become legally
obligated to pay as damages because of injury arising out of (a)
malpractice, error or mistake of the insured, or of a person for whose
acts or omissions the insured is legally responsible … in rendering or
failing to render professional services … committed during the policy
period in practice of the insured’s profession described in the policy.”
Although the insured is responsible for the acts of the employee,
the question is whether damage arose out of rendering or failing to
render professional services. The supreme court of Nebraska, in
holding that no coverage applied under the professional liability policy,
concluded that the boiling of water alone was not an act requiring anyprofessional knowledge or training. It was a routine act that any
unskilled person could perform. Given the ruling in this case, a
general liability policy would have protected the insured for damages
caused by the employee whether there was a professional liability
exclusion attached to the policy or not.
In Mastrom Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company, 337 S.E.2d
162 (1985), a North Carolina court of appeals held that an
accountant’s professional liability insurance did not provide coverage
for damages arising out of fraudulent activities on the part of the
insured. It was decided that such activities did not come within the
scope of professional services.
However, depending on the act itself to determine whether it is
considered professional does not always guarantee the results
mentioned above. In Arizona, a court of appeals, in looking at a claim
by St. Paul Fire & Marine that intentional and improper manipulation
during gynecological examinations was unprofessional and therefore,
not covered by a professional liability policy, decided that the alleged
injuries were within the language of the insurance policy and that
coverage applied. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company v.
Asbury, 720 P.2d 540 (Ariz. App. 1986) explicitly mentioned the Marx
case, above, and rejected the idea that the question of professional
liability coverage turns upon the nature of the tortious act and does
not include all forms of a doctor’s conduct simply because he is a
doctor. The tortious conduct took place in the course of and as an
inseparable part of the act of providing professional services. So, in
this instance, the court looked to the act itself but concluded it was
professional in nature and was the essence of the claim.
Can a nonprofessional ever be considered as having performed a
service of a professional nature? At least one case shows this to be
a possibility though, note, the person causing the injury was a would-
be professional in a training setting. The case is Mason v. Liberty
Mutual Insurance Co., 370 F.2d 925 (1967).A patient in an infirmary brought action against the insured under a
general liability policy to recover for nerve degeneration and loss of
control of the right foot allegedly caused by a hypodermic injection
given by a student nurse—in the presence of a surgeon and
supervisor of nurses. The insurer denied liability because of the policy
exclusion “of injury, sickness or disease due to medical or surgical
services or treatment of any service of a professional nature.” The
United States district court held for the insurer and the patient
appealed.
The United States court of appeals, fifth circuit, upheld the lower
court opinion, stating that the injection—though given by a student
nurse—was of a professional nature within the meaning of the
exclusionary language. The patient argued—to no avail—that while
treatment might have been of a professional nature under some
circumstances, nevertheless, there was administrative, as
distinguished from professional, negligence in permitting a student
nurse to administer treatment in an improper manner.
The court stated, however, that Louisiana law controls and the law
is “that in determining whether or not a particular act or failure to act
is of a professional nature one must look not to the title or character
of the party performing the act but to the act itself.” The action—
administering a hypodermic injection—is of a professional nature and
is excluded.
As previously mentioned, whether a particular act is considered a
professional one may mean the difference between coverage and no
coverage, depending upon the type of policy in force. Sometimes,
however, pinpointing the precise act that leads to injury is not easy.
Exemplifying such a situation is the Louisiana case of Tankersley
v. Insurance Company of North America, 216 So. 2d 333 (1968).
The insured operated a home for the aged and had a general liabilitypolicy covering its operations, but excluding coverage for professional
services.
When a patient’s condition worsened one day, the three nurses on
duty were notified and requested to summon the patient’s physician.
None of the nurses, however, took steps either to observe the patient
or to call the physician. Someone finally did call the physician later in
the evening and the patient was removed to a hospital where she
died. The patient’s daughter subsequently brought suit against the
insured alleging that the sole proximate cause of her mother’s death
was the negligence of the nurses in failing to take notice of the
patient’s condition and in failing to summon a physician.
When the general liability insurer denied the claim on the basis of
the professional services exclusion, the insured argued that the claim
was based upon common negligence of the nurses and that this was
not a professional malpractice action against the hospital-home for
the aged. The crucial question, therefore, was: did the action or
failure to act on the part of the nurses make the policy exclusion
applicable? To answer this question, the court said it is necessary to
look to the nature of the service that the claimant argues was not
performed.
The viewpoint of the Louisiana court of appeal was that when the
nurses decided not to call the physician, they did more than
negligently fail to perform a manual, mechanical operation, they acted
in their professional capacity and on their own responsibility as
employees of the insured. It can be assumed, therefore, that the
nurses exercised their expert judgment in deciding whether to make
the call. That decision constituted a failure to render a nursing service
and caused the claim to fall within the exclusion of the general liability
policy.A case that sought to determine the proximate act causing injury
is Multinomah County v. Oregon Automobile Insurance Co., 470
P.2d 147 (1970). The county had a general liability policy protecting
employees of the sheriff’s office subject to an exclusion of
professional services. Jail authorities failed to give insulin to a diabetic
inmate, thereby causing serious injury. When a claim was presented
to the insurer, it was denied because the failure to administer insulin
was looked upon as a failure to render a professional service—a
claim that is a subject of professional liability insurance and not
general liability insurance. The insured argued, however, that the acts
of its medical technician are those of a craftsman and not of a
professional and that administering insulin is something the person
could have done for himself had the drug been furnished. Therefore,
no professional skill was required.
The court reasoned that if the ability to administer the insulin were
the only consideration involved the county’s contention would be right.
However, it was the court’s view that something more was required
than physical ability to administer the drug and that was the ability to
determine whether the person’s physical condition was such that an
injection was required. Obviously it was required and the technician
did not have the professional competence to recognize it. Since the
county failed to provide the service of someone who had the medical
training to recognize the seriousness of the person’s condition, the
county was without coverage for the claim.
Ocean Accident and Guaranty Corp. v. Hertzberg’s Inc. 100 F.2d
171 (1938) arose when a customer was awarded damages for
injuries caused by electrical treatment administered by a cosmetician
in a beauty shop. The court held that the insured’s general liability
policy did not cover the claim because of the exclusion of injuries
sustained “in consequence of professional services.” The court
decided that the cosmetician was performing a professional service
for the following reason: The word profession means “the occupation
which one professes to be skilled in and to follow, and involves thevocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of
learning or science is used in application to the affairs of others or in
the practice of an art founded upon it.”
In support of finding that services rendered by a beautician are
professional in nature, a Texas court stated that “this case is
distinguishable from those in which the harm is caused by a breach of
a proprietor’s duty to a patron/invitee, instead of by a failure to
exercise a professional beautician’s standard of care.” This was
Holmes v. Employers Casualty Company, 699 S.W.2d 339 (1985).
In conclusion, when an individual or a firm has a business that is
subject to a professional liability exposure as well as a general liability
exposure, questions could arise over just what insurance coverage
should respond to a claim by an injured party. Court decisions
suggest that each case has to be judged on its own individual merits
and facts, with strong reliance not on the title of the person
performing the injurious act, but rather on the act itself.
The Continuous Injury Trigger and
Progressive Injury Exclusions
To clarify that the term “occurrence” was meant to encompass not
only the usual accident, but also exposure to conditions that could
continue for days, weeks, months or years, occurrence was
redefined in 1973 to mean, in part “an accident, including continuous
or repeated exposure to conditions …” This new wording not only
was intended as a clarification but also for purposes of strengthening
the intent that a related series of events attributable to the same
cause or result would be considered as one occurrence, thereby
avoiding the application of policy limits several times. As an extra-
added measure of safety, some additional wording was added to the
Limits of Liability provision which read “all bodily injury and property
damage arising out of continuous or repeated exposure tosubstantially the same general conditions shall be considered as
arising out of one occurrence”.
As time progressed however, this liberalization in the definition of
occurrence dealing with the continuous injury trigger played havoc
with many insurers when the courts awarded coverage, caused by
one occurrence, for various injuries and damage over successive
policy periods. Finally, it was after a 1995 California court decision
where the court adopted a continuous injury trigger that insurers
began to take some drastic measures that extended beyond the
borders of California and currently affect nearly every liability policy
issued today. (The California court case adopting a continuous injury
trigger of coverage which resulted in some drastic measures currently
impacting many, if not most, insureds that purchase commercial
liability insurance is the Montrose Chemical Corp. case.)
It was not too long after insurers began to write liability insurance
on an occurrence basis that they turned their attention toward limiting
the impact of occurrence coverage. Their problem has always been
the fact that occurrence-based general liability coverage is triggered
by injury or damage occurring during the policy period; thus, where
such injury or damage is progressive, each policy during which injury
or damage occurs is triggered. This is in contrast to claims-made
coverage, which is ultimately triggered by a claim made during the
policy period or an extended reporting period; thus, it is the policy
when the claim is reported that responds, regardless of how many
years thereafter injury or damage continues to occur for that event.
The dilemma faced by insurers has been how to enforce a per
occurrence limit when a single occurrence results in injury or damage
over multiple policy periods. Their problem has been compounded by
the fact that a number of courts have ruled the occurrence to be at
the time of injury, and in cases involving progressive injury or damage
to hold for coverage over more than one policy period.The dilemma and the court rulings had insurers arguing that what
they believe should be one occurrence and subject to a single per
occurrence limit is transformed into a multiple occurrence limit
coverage issue. They argue that this, in essence, eliminates the per
occurrence limit in many cases, obligating them to pay multiple policy
limits in progressive injury cases (which, by the way, is precisely the
way occurrence-based coverage is supposed to apply). Insurers
have long been unable to alter this approach, given the fact that doing
so means altering the occurrence-based coverage trigger, which is
injury or damage occurring during the policy period. (On the other
hand, attempts to limit coverage for progressive injury or damage to
a single per occurrence limit—in essence to one policy period—has
been argued to cause confusion and transform occurrence-based
coverage into a modified version of claims-made coverage. Given the
potential application of the wording implemented by insurers,
however, it would appear as though that result is no longer a remote
possibility, even in situations involving multiple occurrences.)
The seminal case that brought about the drastic measures by
insurers, dealing with occurrence-based coverage, is Montrose
Chemical Corp. v. Admiral Insurance Company, 42 Cal.Rptr.2d 324
(1995), which dealt with pollution claims. These claims were tendered
by Montrose to, among others, Admiral Insurance Company, which
had issued a primary layer of liability coverage for a period of four
years. Some of the pollution at one site was alleged to have been
discovered before the Admiral policy went into effect. Another site
was alleged to have experienced a tripling of the amount of
suspected carcinogens in the ground, beginning months prior to the
first Admiral policy’s inception and continuing through the Admiral
policy years.
Six weeks before the first Admiral policy went into effect,
Montrose was identified by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) as a potentially responsible party for response costs. Based
on this information, Admiral denied Montrose’s request for defense.Admiral maintained it had no coverage obligation, because the
pollution was a loss in progress prior to the effective date of its first
policy issued to Montrose.
The court adopted the continuous trigger theory (injury or damage
is deemed to occur continuously over time as long as the event
causing the injury or damage continues to produce injury or damage)
and also rejected application of the so-called loss in progress rule
(this holds that coverage is not applicable when a loss is known or
apparent before the issuance of a policy). Admiral had argued that
Montrose had known about the loss prior to the policy’s inception.
The court, however, held that while Montrose may have known about
the potential effects of pollution, Montrose did not know it would
ultimately be found liable when it applied for and obtained coverage
from the Admiral. The court stated that where there was uncertainty
about the imposition of liability and no legal obligation to pay yet
established, there was an insurable interest for which coverage may
be sought.
In light of this decision, the continuous injury trigger adopted by
the court meant that numerous liability policies could be similarly
activated in many cases involving injury or damage over successive
policy periods. As a result of this decision, some insurers doing
business in California wasted no time in introducing endorsements
designed to restrict coverage to address the court’s ruling.
Interestingly, it appeared that the insurers of excess and surplus lines
market were the first to introduce the endorsements on the policies of
project owners and contractors. Some of the endorsements reduced
coverage drastically on construction-related risks, in fact, far more
restrictive than one might have expected, based on a court case that
involved issues over pollution. Furthermore, although the ruling in the
Montrose case focused on the insurer’s defense obligation, most of
these progressive loss provisions applied to both defense and
indemnity. And, while most endorsements applied to bodily injury andproperty damage, some endorsements also applied to personal and
advertising injury claims and suits.
(Note that the Montrose decision also set forth two general items
that insurers are seeking to deal with through the use of provisions
incorporated into liability coverage or by endorsement: the proper
trigger of coverage to be applied to a liability policy where injury or
damage is continuous or progressively deteriorating over successive
policy periods; and, the loss in progress rule that holds that coverage
is not applicable when a loss is known or apparent before issuance of
a policy.)
In response to a perceived need to address the Montrose ruling in
standard commercial general liability coverage forms, the American
Association of Insurance Services (AAIS) and the Insurance Services
Office (ISO) introduced endorsements to address situations involving
a known loss or loss in progress. The endorsement introduced by
ISO in 1999 was titled, Amendment of Insuring Agreement—Known
Injury or Damage, CG 00 57 09 99, and applied to its CGL
occurrence coverage form. This endorsement was withdrawn in 2001
when its provisions were added to the occurrence form’s insuring
agreement. The endorsement of AAIS, which also was introduced in
1999, still exists and, according to its manual rules, is a mandatory
endorsement. The intent has been to issue provisions that state
coverage will not respond to injury or damage known prior to the
policy inception date. The approach taken is to also address, in the
same provisions, situations of continuing, changed, or recurring injury
or damage to the same person or entity. And, the concept alleged to
underlie the Montrose provisions is said to be the intent to provide
coverage only for fortuitous losses.
Both standard versions of the Montrose provisions state that injury
or damage occurring during the policy period that is not a
continuation, resumption or change in injury or damage known to an
insured prior to the policy inception date, will include injury or damagethat continues, resumes or changes after the policy ends. The
wording states that injury or damage that is covered because it was
not known prior to the policy inception, includes all continuing,
changing and resuming damages. In other words, all continuous
damage, regardless of how many other subsequent policy periods
are involved, can be argued to be covered only under the policy in
which the injury or damage first began. This is, in essence, a prior
insurance condition and represents the ultimate goal of insurers, that
is, to limit coverage to the policy period in which injury or damage
began. This also can be likened to a products liability batch clause
where all injury or damage arising from a certain batch of products is
subject to coverage under the policy when the first injury or damage
from that particular batch occurred.
The result of all this essentially transforms occurrence-based
coverage to a claims-made trigger.
As some insurers have found out, however, it is not easy to find a
court that is receptive to upholding the Montrose-type provision in
CGL policies. A case in point is Desert Mountain Properties Limited
Partnership v. Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Company, 250 P.3d 196
(Ariz. 2011). Soil settlement caused cracks and other damage to fifty
new homes. The developer paid an average of $200,000 per home to
have the soil issues corrected and the damage repaired. It then
sought reimbursement from its insurer. (This is an interesting case in
light of the number of different defenses raised by the insurer, which
ended up paying anyway.)
One of the defenses raised by the insurer was the “known loss”
clause (also referred as the “prior loss” provision), which was raised
because the developer was said to have known of significant
settlement-related problems before it purchased the liability policies.
This particular provision, which appears similar to the one of ISO
policies, stated: This insurance applies … only if: … [p]rior to the
policy period, no insured … and no “employee” authorized by you togive or receive notice of an “occurrence” or claim, knew that the …
“property damage” had occurred, in whole or in part. If such a listed
insured or authorized “employee” knew, prior to the policy period, that
the “property damage” occurred, then any continuation, change or
resumption of such … “property damage” during or after the policy
period will be deemed to have been known prior to the policy period.
The insurer, in this case, argued that the developer knew of soil-
related problems from homeowner complaints and geotechnical
reports received prior to the effective dates of the policies. It argued
this knowledge triggered the known loss clause, even if at the time,
the company did not know of the widespread nature of the problem.
The insurer based this argument on the portion of the known loss
clause applying to knowledge of property damage “in whole or in part
that continu[es], change[s], or resum[es]” during or after the policy
period. (Emphasis added).
The appeals court responded that its review of the record
persuaded it that sufficient evidence existed from which the jurors
could find that the developer lacked knowledge of the relevant
property damage before the policies began. The developer’s vice
president of development at the time testified concerning homeowner
complaints received prior to the initial policy period. He testified that
he knew there was an issue, but it was sent to the general contractor
and the engineers who reviewed them and made recommendations,
which were executed. The customer service issue was then handled,
he said, and the owners signed off on the issue. He also testified that
there was no reason to think that there was a widespread settlement
issue. So, because there was sufficient evidence to support the jury’s
conclusion that the developer did not have knowledge of property
damage caused by faulty soil compaction prior to the insurer’s
policies, it was held that the trial court did not err in denying the
insurer’s judgment as a matter of law on the issue of known loss.The policies also provided that: property damage that occurs
during the policy period and was not known prior to the policy period
includes any continuation, change or resumption of that … property
damage after the end of the policy period. With regard to this
provision, the trial court instructed the jury that the liability policies
provided insurance coverage for property damage that continued,
changed or resumed beyond the end of the policy period, if that
damage occurred during the policy periods. The insurer, however,
argued that given the policies’ known loss clause, the court’s
instruction was misleading and confusing because it was contrary to
the policy language precluding coverage for known losses that
continue or change over time. The appeals court disagreed.
Separation of Insureds
The wording of current liability insurance policies has brought
about questions concerning who is insured and to whom the various
exclusions and conditions apply. The separation of insureds clause
(previously known as the severability of interests clause) under the
CGL form, for example, states that the insurance applies “as if each
named insured were the only named insured’’ and “separately to each
insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought.’’ So a question
arises: if the named insured makes a liability claim against an entity
who is an insured under the named insured’s CGL form, will the
insurer defend that other insured and pay the named insured for his
or her alleged damages?
The idea of the named insured’s being a claimant under his own
liability policy or of the insurer paying for the claim of one insured
against another may seem odd. But the fact is, under current liability
policies, there often may be coverage in such cases. The separation
of insureds clause guarantees that the general liability form will treat
each insured as a separate insured. So, if the named insured is
injured through the negligence of another insured and makes a claim
under his or her own CGL form, the insurer is obligated to defend theother insured and pay the damages, assuming no exclusion is
applicable to the claim.
Some provisions of the liability policy affect the interests of all the
insureds and treat all the insureds the same; but, a distinction is
sometimes made between the “insureds’’ and the “named insured.’’ If
the clause distinctly mentions the named insured or applies to “you’’
and “your’’, the clause refers to the named insured only. For example,
the duties in the event of occurrence or claim clause states that if a
claim is made or suit is brought against any insured, “you’’ (the named
insured) must record the specifics and notify the insurer; the fellow
insureds do not have this responsibility. On the other hand, this same
clause states that “no insured’’ will voluntarily make a payment or
incur any expense without the consent of the insurer; this means each
and every insured, not just the named insured.
Also, consider the liability policy’s exclusions. Some exclusions
refer only to the named insured (you) and others refer to the insured.
If the exclusion is only for the named insured (such as (j) (1)—
property damage to property owned, rented, or occupied by the
named insured), that exclusion cannot be said to apply to the
interests of an insured other than the named insured. If the named
insured negligently damages another insured’s property and that
other insured makes a claim, the named insured’s CGL form would
respond to that claim.
And, where an exclusion applies to “the insured’’, how are the
other insureds affected? For example, exclusion (a) refers to bodily
injury or property damage expected or intended from the standpoint
of “the insured.’’ If the named insured is a retail store and one of its
employees intentionally hits a customer who was being a bother, it is
probable that the exclusion will apply to a claim against the employee.
However, the named insured company did not expect or intend the
incident to happen, let alone the injury, so the exclusion should not
prevent liability coverage for the named insured if a claim is madeagainst it for the injury its employee caused. Know that the phrase
“the insured’’ is particular in its application as opposed to “an insured’’
or “any insured’’ in that such a phrase refers to the particular insured
(for example, the employee hitting a customer), but not to other
insureds.
(As an example of judicial thinking here, the Supreme Court of
California in Minkler v. Safeco Insurance Company of America, 232
P.3d 612 (2010) declared that “each exclusion in a liability policy
applicable to an or any insured must be examined individually, and in
context, to determine the effect a severability clause might have on its
operation”.)
Similarly, exclusion (e) on the CGL form—employers liability—
refers to bodily injury to an employee of the insured. The question
here is whether this exclusion applies to claims against all insureds or
simply against the insured who is the employer of the injured worker.
As an example: an employee of Jones is injured through the
negligence of Smith, who is an insured under the liability policy of
Jones. If the employee makes a claim against Smith, is Jones’ insurer
obligated to defend the claim and pay any damages? This exclusion
uses the word “the’’ instead of “an’’ or “any’’; therefore, the exclusion
should be applied only to Jones as “the’’ employer of the injured
worker and Smith should have coverage for the claim.
Of course, these conclusions are always subject to judicial
interpretation. The following information presents some court cases
that have discussed the issue of who is an insured when the
insurance policy has a separation of insureds clause.
In the following decisions, courts have held that no employee of
the named insured could recover under the named insured’s policy
against anyone included as an added insured, in spite of the presence
of a separation (or severability) clause. (The following cases are stillconsidered good law, not having been overruled in a different case or
by a higher court.) See Ohio Casualty Ins. Co. v. United States
Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 223 N.E.2d 851 (1967); Hartford Accident
and Indemnity Co. v. Continental Casualty Co., 384 F.2d 37 (1966);
Kelly v. State Automobile Ins. Assn., 288 F.2d 734 (1961); Chrysler
Corp. v. Insurance Co. of North America, 328 F. Supp. 445 (1971);
St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Wabash Fire & Casualty Ins. Co.,
264 F. Supp. 637 (1967); Benton v. Canal Ins. Co., 130 So. 2d 840
(1961); Travelers Ins. Co. v. American Casualty Co., 441 P.2d 177
(1968); and Maryland Casualty Co. v. American Fidelity & Casualty
Co., 330 F.2d 526 (1963). In addition, courts in Alabama, Nevada,
North Carolina, North Dakota, and Washington (or federal courts
applying those states’ law) have ruled similarly.
Note that the Benton case has been cited in other cases, with a
focus mainly on the use of different language to describe who is an
insured. In Centennial Insurance Company v. Ryder Truck Rental,
Inc., 149 F.3d 378 (USCA 5th 1998), the court of appeals noted that
the Benton holding reached only insurance policies with severability of
interests clauses worded in a certain way; the Benton decision would
not be applicable in the Centennial case because the language of the
policy in question in the Centennial case differed from that in the
Benton case. While Benton held that a separate insured could not
recover against another insured under the same policy, the Centennial
holding was that an exclusion that applied to “the insured” did not bar
coverage for an additional insured where the policy contained a
separation of insureds provision that treated each insured as a
separate insured.
And in Penske Truck Leasing Company v. Republic Western
Insurance Company, 407 F. Supp.2d 741 (E.D. N.C. 2006), a
Federal district court echoed this sentiment, because the language of
the clause in the Benton case was not the same as the language in
the Penske case. The court said that the language of the severabilityclause in the particular policy in question in the Penske case required
the court to apply an exclusion separately to the insured who sought
coverage and against whom a claim has been brought. Incidentally,
the court in this case also included instructive words pertaining to the
difference between exclusions that use the words “the insured” as
opposed to the words “any insured”.
The Travelers case was cited in a decision from the Supreme
Court of South Dakota. In St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance
Company v. Schilling, 520 N.W.2d 884 (S.D. 1994), the court cited
the Travelers case to show that courts are divided as to whether the
presence of a severability clause invalidates an employee exclusion.
This is shown by the cases listed next.
In other jurisdictions, courts have favorably cited the severability
clause in holding that the employee exclusion does not apply to bodily
injury claims of an employee of the named insured against another
insured under the named insured’s policy: Marwell Construction, Inc.
v. Underwriters of Lloyd’s London, 465 P.2d 298 (1970); Employers
Mutual Liability Ins. Co. v. Houston Fire & Casualty Ins. Co., 213 F.
Supp. 738 (1963); Shelby Mutual Ins. Co. v. Schuitema, 183 So. 2d
571 (1966); Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Aetna Life 7 Casualty Co.,
599 S.W.2d 516 (1980); Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v. Iowa National
Mutual Ins. Co., 181 N.W.2d 247 (1970); Commercial Standard Ins.
Co. v. American General Ins. Co., 455 S.W.2d 714 (1970); Caribou
Four Corners, Inc. v. Truck Ins. Exchange, 443 F.2d 796 (1971); and
Pepsi-Cola Bottling Company of Charleston v. Indemnity Insurance,
318 F.2d 714 (1963). As something of an example of the basic
reasoning in these decisions, the Supreme Court of South Dakota in
Northland Insurance Company v. Zurich American Insurance
Company, 743 N.W.2d 145 (2007) said this: “If severability provisions
invalidated a policy’s exclusions, such a provision would operate to
provide more coverage to an additional insured than to the namedinsured, and such an outcome will not be endorsed because it directly
contravenes earlier case reasoning”.
The Liberty Mutual case is cited in a case from the United States
District Court in Pennsylvania, a case that offers an extensive review
of the separation of insureds clause and the judicial interpretations of
that clause: Carbone, Inc. v. General Accident Insurance Company,
937 F. Supp. 413 (USDC, E.D. Pennsylvania 1996). This case also
explores the different results that can occur when the insurance policy
uses the words “any insured” as opposed to “the insured” in
exclusions. The court notes that the vast majority of jurisdictions that
have addressed the issue hold that the severability doctrine or a
separation of insureds clause modifies the meaning of an exclusion
phrased in terms of “the insured” such that the exclusion will only be
effective if it applies with respect to the specific insured seeking
coverage. In other words, “the insured” means only the person
claiming coverage. The use of “any insured” can create joint
obligations and prohibit recovery by an innocent co-insured, thus
causing exclusions to be unaltered by the separation of insureds
clause. But, the use of “the insured” does cause an alteration.
Some cases have followed this latter trend. Barnette v. Hartford
Insurance Group, 653 P.2d 1375 (1982), Reliance Insurance
Company v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Company, 468 N.E.2d 621
(1983), and Worcester Mutual Insurance Company v. Marnell, 496
N.E.2d 158 (1986) are cases where courts have cited the severability
clause in holding that an insurance policy does apply to claims that
might otherwise have been denied due to the employee exclusion;
Barnette was a Wyoming case and Reliance and Worcester were
from Massachusetts. (Note that in Argent v. Brady, 901 A.2d 419
[2006], in commenting on the Worcester Mutual case, the Superior
Court of New Jersey said that “a preponderance of the cases finding
coverage as the result of severability clauses arise from claims by
innocent parties or ones against whom claims are tangential”.)A case worth reviewing is from the Supreme Court of Oklahoma.
It cites the Barnette case and offers an extensive list of case law
from around the country on the subject of the separation of insureds
clause under a liability policy. The case is BP America, Inc. v. State
Auto Property & Casualty Insurance Company, 148 P.3d 832 (2005).
Separation of insureds should not be confused with putting
additional insureds on a liability policy. An additional insured should
certainly be treated as a separate insured in keeping with the
separation of insureds clause. However, such insureds are given their
status through the use of endorsements and their coverage is
governed by the wording on those endorsements. If an additional
insured makes a claim against the named insured or vice-versa, the
question of the insurer providing defense and payment of the claim
should be answered with an examination of the additional insured
endorsement and not just the separation of insureds clause.
The Impaired Property Exclusion of Liability
Policies
The impaired property exclusion found in liability policies continues
to cause a great deal of confusion in part, because the breadth and
scope of its application is difficult to understand. The purpose of the
impaired property exclusion is to exclude damages or costs (or both)
associated with tangible property that cannot be used, or is made
less useful because it incorporates the named insured’s product or
work, or the named insured fails to fulfill the terms of a contract, but
only if that property can be restored to use by the repair, removal, or
replacement of the work or product or by fulfilling the terms of the
contract.
As usual, regardless of the purpose of the exclusion, the exclusion
is subject to judicial interpretation. For example, see American
Insurance Company v. Crown Packaging International, 813 F.Supp.2d 1027 (2011), a case from the U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of Indiana. Briefly, in this case, Crown sold plastic containers
manufactured by a wholly-owned subsidiary. One of Crown’s largest
customers, Ecolab, purchased these containers to package its liquid
soap products. This case arose after Ecolab began to experience
problems with some of the containers filled with soap. Before the
problems were resolved, Ecolab had to manually inspect its inventory
of containers, at the end of the manufacturing process, and dispose
of, or rework the soap found in the defective containers. Reworking
the soap involved removing it from the containers by cutting them off
the solidified soap and then reblending the new material in batches.
Ecolab eventually decided to dispose of the remaining defective
containers filled with their product, instead of reworking the soap
because the amount of defective material being dealt with was
impacting its manufacturing process.
One of Crown’s arguments, dealing with the impaired property
exclusion, was that since Ecolab’s soap was physically damaged,
that exclusion did not apply. The court disagreed, stating that
Ecolab’s soap inside the containers was physically undamaged and
remained in the condition Ecolab intended for it to be in, until Ecolab
scrapped it. Ecolab’s economic decision to throw out the undamaged
soap, the court said, was not physical damage to the soap. The only
damage, it said, that occurred was loss of use. But even if this were
not the case, the court went on to explain, the [impaired property]
exclusion nevertheless applied to property damage “to impaired
property or property that has not been physically injured.” If it was
necessary to specify that the exclusion applied equally to property not
physically injured, the court added, then “impaired property” must
also include property which might be physically injured. The court also
explained that the policy’s definition of “impaired property,” as
tangible property that cannot be used, or is less useful, because it
incorporates the insured’s defective product did not rule out physical
injury to the tangible property. As American Insurance Company
pointed out in its reply, the court concluded, the exclusion did not evencome into play until there had been property damage, and property
damage is either physical injury, or loss of use.
(The way the “impaired property” exclusion is worded, the court
was right in how it interpreted the exclusion’s application, even though
that is not what is intended. That also is the reason why it is difficult
to grasp the proper meaning of this exclusion. As other courts review
and accept this kind of decision, the problem over the exclusion’s
proper application will continue to be confusing.)
Another case to consider is Pinkerton & Laws v. Royal Insurance
Company of America, 227 F.Supp.2d 1348. The U.S. District Court in
that decision stated that the impaired property exclusion is included in
a policy to prevent the insured from claiming economic losses
resulting from the insured’s work or product.
And see Standard Fire Insurance Company v. Chester-O’Donley
& Associates, Inc., et al., 972 S.W.2d 1. (Ct. App. TN 1998). This
case arose after a new music building, which was substantially
completed, began to reveal some serious problems with the HVAC
system that could not be remedied by fine-tuning it. It was
determined that the problems were caused by defects in the system’s
ductwork. In light of this situation, the general contractor terminated it
contract with the subcontractor performed the mechanical portions of
the work. The general contractor then submitted a claim to its insurer
which paid for removing and replacing the entire duct system.
When the subcontractor submitted its claim with its insurer, it was
denied. Turning to the “impaired property” exclusion, the court stated
that the exclusion’s effect was to bar coverage for loss of use claims
(1) when the loss was caused solely by the insured’s failure to
provide work of the quality or performance capabilities called for by
the contract and (2) when there has been no physical injury to
property other than the insured’s work itself. The court went on to saythat the exclusion did not apply, if there was damage to property
other than the insured’s work.
The court also referred to two texts, which featured illustrations
on the application of the “impaired property” exclusion involving
heating and ventilation systems. One of these was the Commercial
General Liability Coverage Guide, written by Donald S. Malecki,
published by The National Underwriter Company. The example given
by the court from this book stated: [S]ay that the insured installs a
heating and ventilation system in a new building. If the system later
proves to be defective, resulting in the loss of use of the building
while the system is being repaired or replaced, the insurer can cite
the portion of the exclusion relating to “impaired property” in denying
coverage for a resulting loss-of-use claim against its insured.
Another case that demonstrates what the “impaired property”
exclusion is intended to exclude is PCS Nitrogen Fertilizer, L.P. v.
U.S. Filter/Arrowhead, Inc. et al., 834 So.2d 456 (La. App. 1 Cir.
2002). In this case, PCS had entered into a water services
agreement, which required Arrowhead to design, install, and service
a water purification system. PCS alleged that Arrowhead failed to
provide a water supply system in conformity with the contract,
thereby breaching the agreement and forcing PCS to shut down its
operations.
PCS sued Arrowhead and its insurer, Commerce Insurance,
alleging that as a result of the shutdown, PCS incurred maintenance
and start-up costs, as well as the time and value of lost production.
Commerce denied coverage to its named insured, Arrowhead, on the
basis that the pleadings, depositions and other discovery responses
submitted by PCS made it clear that there had been no physical injury
to tangible property and that the only damages claimed were for
breach of contract and loss of use of the water that was supposed to
have been generated by the water purification system. In otherwords, the exclusion applied to pure economic loss based on breach
of contract and nothing more.
Commerce Insurance pointed to these facts in arguing it has a
right to rely on the “impaired property” exclusion in denying coverage
to Arrowhead. PCS argued that the “impaired property” exclusion
was ambiguous, because it did not define the term, “physical injury,”
as used in the exception to this exclusion for “the loss of use of other
property arising out of sudden and accidental physical injury to the
insured’s product or work after it has been put to its intended use.”
The court summarily dismissed this argument noting that PCS’s claim
was not for damages due to physical injury to its plant, equipment
and other property. Further, the court noted that the term “physical
injury” would be given its plain meaning, if that had been necessary.
The court went on to hold that the “impaired property” exclusion
unambiguously excluded coverage for the loss of use associated with
a breach of the water services agreement.
What may beg a question here is what is meant by word
“sudden,” used in conjunction with the above word “accidental” with
reference to situations where coverage may apply as an exception to
the “impaired property” exclusion. Since the word “sudden” is not a
defined term, and it creates a temporal effect, what the courts decide
sometimes is interesting.
One such case is Indiana Lumbermens Insurance Company v.
PrimeWood, Inc., v. Travelers Insurance Co., v. St. Paul Mercury
Insurance Co., Case Nos. A-3-97-03; l A3-97-22 and A3-97-23, (U.S.
Dist. Ct. N.Dakota 1999). PrimeWood, Inc. manufactured cabinet
doors. From 1989 through 1994, it used in its manufacturing process
a white plastic foil supplied by GmbHJ& Co. Veredelungen (Roxan), a
German company. From 1989 through 1991, the cabinet doors,
incorporating the white plastic foil, were apparently of satisfactory
quality.In 1992, PrimeWood was said to have begun receiving complaints
from its customers, cabinet manufacturers, about premature
yellowing of the cabinet doors. PrimeWood, in turn, complained to the
foil supplier, Roxan, which initially insisted the yellowing problem was
due to PrimeWood’s manufacturing process. Subsequently,
independent testing revealed that the Roxan product was chemically
unstable. After discontinuing use of this foil product, the yellowing
problem disappeared as to new production. At this point, PrimeWood
decided to bring a civil action to recover damages from Roxan.
Although PrimeWood had CGL and umbrella liability policies from
three different insurers for the time periods involved covering the
damages incurred from customer complaints, this case dealt solely
with the coverages provided by the St. Paul.
After the court took into consideration (but did not resolve)
whether there was property damage, and decided that no coverage
applied for damage to any of the named insured’s products (that
which it made or made on its behalf), the court turned to the
“impaired property” exclusion. The court repeated how this insurer’s
exclusion read: This insurer was not obligated to cover “property
damage to impaired property, or property that hasn’t been physically
damaged, that’s caused by: [the insured’s] faulty or dangerous
products or completed work; or a delay or failure in fulfilling the terms
of a contract or agreement.” The court then turned to this exclusion’s
exception which provides that the exclusion did not apply “to damages
that result from the loss of use of other property not physically
damaged that’s caused by sudden and accidental physical damage to
[the insured’s] products … after they’ve been put to their intended
use.”
On this issue, the insurer argued that the cabinets incorporating
the doors constituted “impaired property,” as defined in the policy,
thereby precluding coverage because of the “impaired property”
exclusion. PrimeWood, which was said by the court to have
apparently conceded that the cabinets were “impaired property” orproperty that was not physically damaged, argued that the exception
to the exclusion (in question) applied because the “yellowing” of the
cabinet doors occurred in a “sudden and accidental” manner. The
parties, however, contested whether the premature yellowing could
be fairly characterized as sudden and accidental.
In considering the phrase “sudden and accidental,” the court, after
reviewing cases in other jurisdictions, concluded its meaning in
PrimeWood’s favor. These cases were: Just v. Land Reclamation,
Ltd., 456 N.W.2d 570 (Wis. 1990), which concluded the phrase
“sudden and accidental” to be susceptible to more than one
reasonable meaning, including “abrupt and immediate,” as well as
“unexpected and unintended,” thus ambiguous, and consequently
construed in favor of the insured; Patz v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins.
Co., 15 F.3d 699 (7th Cir. 1994), which acknowledged the Wisconsin
Supreme Court’s interpretation of “sudden and accidental” as
“unintended and unexpected,” as set out in the preceding Just case;
and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. FAG Bearings Corp., 153 F.3d
919 (8th Cir. 1998), which interpreted Missouri law and concluding
that the phrase “sudden and accidental” included a “temporal element
such that it is “abrupt, immediate and unexpected.”
From the court’s perspective of this issue, the premature
yellowing of the doors was said to be “unexpected and unintended”
on the part of PrimeWood. Even if a temporal element was
presumed, the court said, the relative rate of the yellowing of the
doors was “sudden” in comparison to the normal rate of yellowing to
be expected. The court therefore concluded that the exception to the
impaired property exclusion was applicable. Consequently, the insurer
was precluded from denying coverage under this exclusion, leaving
PrimeWood limited to recovering for property damage to others.
Because this court did not find PrimeWood’s claims conclusively
foreclosed by the arguments raised by its insurer, St. Paul, the
latter’s motion for summary judgment was denied.Now, what sometimes is overlooked in the haste of an insurer’s
denying a claim, or by an insured failing to consider all provisions
having to do with the impaired property exclusion is the exception
within the definition of “impaired property. This states to the effect
that for property to fall with the definition of “impaired property,” it has
to be property that can be restored to use by (1) the repair,
replacement, adjustment or removal of the named insured’s product
or work, or (2) the named insured’s fulfilling the terms of the contract
or agreement. Conversely, if the property in question cannot be
restored to through repair, replacement, etc. or through fulfilling the
contract or agreement, the exclusion (m) does not apply.
For example, in Shade Foods, Inc. v. Innovative Products Sales &
Marketing, Inc., 78 Cal. App. 4th 847 (2000), the impaired property
exclusion was held to be inapplicable where cereal nut clusters, found
to contain wood splinters, could not be restored to use. Another
example is Harleysville Worcester Insurance Company v. Paramount
Concrete, 10 F.Supp.3d 252 (2014). The U.S. District Court in that
case stated that the exclusion does not bar coverage where the
insured’s work has been inextricably incorporated into a finished
product such that it is impossible to remove the component from the
whole.
A number of different approaches can be used to determine the
applicability of the impaired property exclusion. Probably the most
common scenario for using a checklist is not in determining whether
coverage applies, but, instead, in coming to the conclusion that the
“impaired property” does or does not apply. The reason for this
statement is that coverage will not be won alone, simply by showing
that this exclusion does not apply. As has become somewhat obvious
over the years, the “impaired property” exclusion is but one of several
such provisions that usually have to be considered in a given claim
situation. The exercise of a checklist, therefore, helps to prove or
disprove the application of this exclusion. In other words, even if this
exclusion is found to be inapplicable, the insured still will have othersto address in coming to the final conclusion of whether coverage
applies.
Assume for purposes of illustration that a manufacturer’s
component part, when added to a machine of another manufacturer,
for purposes of sale to others, causes the machine to work
improperly resulting in loss of use. It is determined that the machine
can be restored to use with the removal and replacement of the
defective component of the named insured. The manufacturer who
purchases these components bring a legal action against the
component supplier for loss costs and expenses. The component
supplier maintains a standard CGL policy that includes Products and
Completed Operations coverage.
So, consider: Is there “property damage” as defined? If the
answer were to be no, that would be the end of the matter for
purposes of this exclusion. The answer in this case, however, should
be yes in light of the second definition of “property damage.” If the
insurer were to also maintain that the first definition of “property
damage” also applied, it would have to be dealt separately after the
application of this query.
Now consider: Is there property damage to other tangible
property that cannot be used or is less useful? If the answer is no,
that is the end of the matter. The answer here is yes, because the
component has made the manufacturer’s machine work improperly. In
light of this answer, one needs to proceed to the next question.
Is the loss of use or impairment of the manufacturer’s machine
due to the incorporation of the named insured’s component (“your
product”)? If the answer is no, that is the end of matter in considering
this exclusion. The answer here, however, is yes, because there was
loss of use of the manufacturer’s machine. This requires proceeding
to the next question.Can the other property, i.e., the manufacturer’s machine be
restored to use by the repair or replacement of the named insured’s
component product? If the answer is no, this exclusion would not
apply. In this case, however, the manufacturer’s machine could be
restored to use by the removal and replacement of the named
insured’s component part. Therefore, one needs to proceed to the
next question.
Has the definition of “impaired property” under the component
supplier’s CGL policy been met? If the answer is no, that is end of
the matter. The answer here, however, should be yes. Tangible
property (the named insured’s machine) cannot be used or is less
useful because it incorporated the component supplier’s product that
is known or thought to be defective, deficient, or inadequate, and can
be restored to use only by its removal and replacement.
Finally, did the loss of use of the manufacturer’s machine arise out
of sudden and accidental physical injury to the named insured’s
component product after it was incorporated into the manufacturer’s
machine and put to its intended use? If the answer is yes, this
exclusion does not apply. If, however, the answer is no, this exclusion
would apply, which is the case here, because there was no sudden
and accidental physical injury to the component supplier’s product.
Blanket Additional Insureds
The reason for blanket additional insured endorsements for use
with commercial general liability coverage forms is to eliminate the
insurer’s necessity of having to issue individual endorsements (or in
the insurance vernacular, scheduled endorsements). That, in fact, is
the only advantage because the needs of additional insureds vary and
so too, does the nature of the coverage. In other words, a blanket
endorsement is not necessarily suited for all persons or organizations
requiring additional insured coverage.An erroneous point about the blanket additional insured
endorsement is that it is broad in scope. That is not true! They can be
broad if they are amended to fit the needs of a particular class of
risks. These endorsements, however, usually are very limited.
Another point about the blanket additional insured endorsement is that
it will contain more verbiage than a scheduled endorsement, because
underwriters will not be underwriting each additional insured request,
and out of necessity, must add provisions such as a professional
liability exclusion whether such an exposure exists or not.
Strictly from a construction contractor’s perspective, one of the
exposures commonly overlooked in covering additional insureds is
when a party not in privity with the contracting parties also wants to
be covered. An example is a project owner when the contract is
made between a general contractor and a subcontractor. The project
owner in this instance, in not being one of the contracting parties, is
considered not to be in privity with the others. This is important
because some endorsements limit coverage solely to parties in
privity.
An example is the standard ISO blanket additional insured
endorsement titled, “Additional Insured—Owners, Lessees Or
Contractors—A utomatic Status When Required In Construction
Agreement With You”, CG 20 33 04 13. This endorsement is not
necessarily limited to owners, lessees or contractors but the title is
very telling, because it applies to any one or more persons or
organizations who have contracted in a construction-related
agreement with the named insured. In other words, this standard ISO
endorsement is limited to the party or parties who have contracted
(or who are in privity) with the named insured. So, for example, if a
general contractor requests additional insured coverage whenever
one of its subcontractors retains the services of a subsubcontractor,
this standard ISO endorsement issued in conjunction with a
subsubcontractor’s CGL policy will not apply to the general
contractor.The problem here is that the producer, for one, will not know that
the standard ISO blanket additional insured endorsement will fall
short of the mark. Unless the producer reads the contract between
the parties and reads the blanket additional insured endorsement to
see exactly what coverage is provided, the producer will confront a
coverage issue. What makes matters worse is that such a situation
can actually happen.
One such example of this is AB Green Gansevoort, LLC v. Peter
Scalamandre & Sons, Inc., 102 A.D.3d 425 (2013). The project
owner sought coverage where the contract was between a material
supplier and a subcontractor. The additional insured endorsement
limited coverage to “when you (material supplier) and such …
organization have agreed in writing in a contact or agreement that
such … organization be added as an additional insured on your
policy”. Since the project owner was not a party to that contract, it
was not an additional insured. Another case is Westfield Insurance
Company v. FCL Builders, Inc., 948 N.E.2d 115 (2011), which
involved a general contractor who sought additional insured coverage,
but failed at that attempt when the contract was between a
subcontractor and a sub-subcontractor.
Regardless of the additional insured coverage requested, insurers
today are making coverage, at least in part, contingent on what is
being requested in a written contract or agreement. This means that
to the extent an insurer is willing to provide the coverage, that
coverage needs to be specifically required in a contract or agreement
or the insurer is not likely to provide it.Chapter 12
Court Cases of Interest
Duty to Defend
In Evanston Ins. Co. v. Lapolla Insustries, Inc. the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, affirming a decision by the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of Texas, has ruled that an insurance
company was not obligated to defend its insured against claims that
vapors from the insured’s spray polyurethane foam (SPF) insulation
had caused bodily injuries and property damage to homeowners.
Insurer brought action against the insured manufacturer of spray
polyurethane foam (SPF) insulation, seeking declaratory judgment
that it did not have a duty to defend or to indemnify the insured under
its CGL and excess policies in underlying litigation arising from injuries
that were allegedly caused by installation of the insureds product
during home renovation. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit, affirming a decision by the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of Texas, ruled that the insurance company was not obligated
to defend its insured against claims that vapors from the SPF
insulation had caused bodily injuries and property damage to
homeowners. Evanston Ins. Co. v. Lapolla Industries, Inc., No. 15-
20213 (5th Cir. Dec. 23, 2015).
In a case where an employee of the insured was injured while
demolishing a chimney, the question that arose was whether or not
the insurer is obligated to defend and indemnify the insured in an
underlying personal injury action. The trial court, affirmed by an
appellate court in New York, ruled that a CGL policy’s classificationlimitations of coverage “merely define the activities that were included
within the scope of coverage” and did “not constitute exclusions from
coverage that would otherwise exist. Black Bull Contracting, LLC v.
Indian Harbor Ins. Co., (N.Y. App. Div. Jan. 5, 2016)
Early in 2016, an appellate court in New York reversed a trial
courts opinion by ruling that an insurance company was not obligated
to defend or indemnify its insured with respect to a particular lawsuit
where the insured had never notified it about the lawsuit despite the
fact that it had notified the insurer about the underlying accident. The
case is Kraemer Building Corp. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., No. 521572
(N.Y. App. Div. 3d Dep’t Feb. 18, 2016.
In Awards Deport, LLC. V. Scottsdale Ins. Co. a federal district
court in Texas has found that there is no coverage for claims that an
insured had acted with knowledge that it was violating the underlying
plaintiff’s trade dress rights and that it would inflict personal and
advertising injury on the underlying plaintiff. The court stated that,
after considering “only the eight corners” of the policy and looking at
the complaint that the “Knowing Violation of Rights of Another”
exclusion applied to exclude coverage and, therefore, that the insurer
had no duty to defend in the lawsuit. Awards Depot, LLC. V.
Scottsdale Ins. Co., No. H-5-3201 (S.D. Tex. Feb. 16, 2016).
An appellate court in Wisconsin, affirmed the decision of the trial
court and ruled that negligent misrepresentation claims by buyers of a
condominium were not covered by the seller’s insurance policy and
that the insurer, therefore, had no duty to defend or indemnify the
seller. The case is Miller v. Mardak, No. 2015AP206 (Wisc. Ct. App.
April 5, 2016).
The Wisconsin Supreme Court “unequivocally” held that there is
“no exception to the four-corners rule in duty to defend cases in
Wisconsin” and, after comparing the four corners of the underlyingcomplaint to the terms of the CGL policy at issue in the case, has
concluded that the “Your Product” exclusion applied to preclude
coverage. Since the four-corners rule always applies in Wisconsin, it
is safe to assume that what provisions that are listed in the policy are
the ones that will be held up in court. The case is Water Well
Solutions Service Group Inc. v. Consolidated Ins. Co., No.
2014AP2484 (Wisc. June 30, 2016).
In a case where an insured general contractor brought breach
action against a CGL insurer for a breach of contract that insurer
owed a duty to defend and indemnify as part of a presuit process to
resolve a claim for construction defects, and that the insurer
breached by failing to defend the general contractor in the first place.
The insurer argued that there was no “case” for which to provide
defense. The U.S. Court of Appeals to the Eleventh Circuit has asked
the Florida Supreme Court to decide whether a statutorily prescribed
notice and repair process constituted a “suit” under the CGL policy, in
order to trigger Insurer’s duty to defend. The case is Altman
Contractors, Inc. v. Crum & Forster Specialty Ins. Co., No. 15-12816
(11th Cir. Aug. 2, 2016)
The insured’s general liability insurer brought an action against the
insured for a declaratory judgment that it owed no duty to defend the
insured in an underlying lawsuit. This case is Cincinnati Insurance
Company v. H.D. Smith, 829 F.3d 771 (2016).
West Virginia sued H.D. Smith and other pharmaceutical
distributors, seeking to hold them liable for contributing to the state’s
epidemic of prescription drug abuse. West Virginia alleged that the
defendants acted negligently, recklessly, and in contravention of West
Virginia law, and that this cost the state hundreds of millions of dollars
every year. H.D. Smith sought coverage under its general liability
policy with Cincinnati Insurance Company. The insurer refused to
defend the lawsuit and filed this declaratory judgment action. TheU.S. District Court entered judgment in favor of the insurer and this
appeal followed.
The United States Court of Appeals, Seventh Circuit, noted that
the Cincinnati policy issued to H.S. Smith covered lawsuits seeking
damages “because of bodily injury”. The court said that such a policy
provides broader coverage than one that covers damages only “for
bodily injury”. To the court, this meant that if the insured had a policy
that only covered damages for bodily injury, it would be reasonable to
conclude that the damages sought do not fall within the insurer’s duty.
However, if the insurance contract provides for damages because of
bodily injury, then the insurer would have a duty to defend and
indemnify.
In effect, the U.S. Court of Appeals, Seventh Circuit, makes a
distinction between coverage for damages “because of bodily injury”
and coverage for damages “for bodily injury” in its decision in favor of
the insured. In other words, if the policy in question here applied only
to damages for bodily injury, there would have to be some bodily
injury to the plaintiff. In this case, there was no bodily injury alleged to
have been wrought upon the underlying plaintiff (the state of West
Virginia), but the state did suffer excessive costs in treating citizens
that were injured because of bodily injury. The court offers an
interesting and subtle distinction to establish the duty to defend.
Cincinnati Insurance Company v. H.D. Smith, 829 F.3d 771 (2016)
Occurrence
In one of the most important CGL decisions of the year, Mark v.
Sunshine Plaza, Inc., a federal district court in Louisiana ruled that a
CGL policy did not cover claims that the insured’s property violated
federal accessibility regulations under the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA). In its decision, the district court first found that it was
“clear” that there was no allegation of any property damage and that
the only “property” referenced in the complaint was defendants ownpremises. The district court then found that the complaint had not
alleged an “occurrence,” reasoning that ADA violations were not an
“occurrence” because the conduct that caused the liability was the
failure to accommodate the disabled, and that failure to
accommodate was “intentional, not some fortuitous circumstance.”
The district court also ruled that the complaint had not asserted any
personal and advertising injury, and noted that of the seven specific
acts of wrongful conduct that fell under the policy coverage for
“personal and advertising injury,” only wrongful eviction seemed to
have any possible connection to the claims. It then agreed that
wrongful eviction required “actual impingement” of “possessory
rights,” and that the plaintiff did not allege a possessory interest in
defendants’ property. The district court concluded, therefore, that the
policy did not cover allegations that property violated federal ADA
regulations governing accessibility. Mark v. Sunshine Plaza, Inc., No.
16-455 (E.D. La. Nov. 22, 2016).
In Mesa Underwriters Specialty Ins. Co., v. Myers, where claims
that roof tar had escaped from a roof and flowed into Lake Erie were
brought, a district court in Ohio ruled that the total pollution exclusion
in a CGL policy precluded coverage for such claims. The defendant
contended that the exclusion did “not apply to bar coverage for the
claim for property damage to the building itself” as the policy stated,
because the damage to the roof “was not caused by a discharge,
dispersal, seepage, migration, release or escape” of the sealant, but
instead the damage was caused by the sealant’s failure to harden.
The district court concluded that the damages to the roof resulted
from defendants own faulty workmanship and not from an
“occurrence” and as a result that it did not have to decide whether
they also were subject to the total pollution exclusion. Mesa
Underwriters Specialty Ins. Co., v. Myers, No. 3:14CV2201 N.D.
Ohio Aug. 16, 2016).
In Decker Plastics Inc. v. West Bend Mutual Ins. Co., the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit ruled that allegedly “defectiveworkmanship” that resulted in damage not “only to the work product
itself” but also to other property was an occurrence. As a result of
that ruling the Eighth Circuit reversed a decision by the U.S. District
Court for the Southern District of Iowa. In its decision, the Eighth
Circuit explained that, under Iowa law, a claim of “defective
workmanship” standing alone that resulted in damages “only to the
work product itself,” was not an occurrence. The circuit court
reasoned, the alleged deterioration of the bags was a covered
occurrence and the covered property damage (if any) was to the
property other than the bags that were the faulty work-product
themselves. The circuit court reversed the district court’s ruling that
there was no “accident” and, therefore, no “occurrence” and,
therefore, no coverage of the claim. Decker Plastics Inc. v. West
Bend Mutual Ins. Co., No. 15-2861 (8th Cir. Aug. 19, 2016).
The liability insurer brought an action against the insured and
telephone call recipients for a declaratory judgment that it had no duty
to defend or indemnify the insured in litigation to recover for the
insured placing telephone calls to play prerecorded message to solicit
business. This case is Old Dominion Insurance Company v. Stellar
Concepts & Design, 189 So.3d 293 (2016).
The underlying lawsuit arose from a previously-settled class action
lawsuit wherein the plaintiffs alleged that they were the recipients of
phone calls with a prerecorded message soliciting the plaintiffs to use
Stellar for their business needs. The plaintiffs alleged that the calls
caused damages because there was a loss of use of their telephones
due to the phones being inundated with robotic telephone
solicitations. In that trial, the court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs.
In response to that judgment, Old Dominion filed a declaratory
judgment action that it had no duty to defend or indemnify its insured,
Stellar Concepts & Designs. The District Court of Appeal of Florida,
Fourth District, noted the argument of the insurer that there was no
occurrence to trigger coverage and in the alternative, if there was anoccurrence, the expected or intended injury exclusion applied to
prevent any coverage. The insured countered that the calls qualify as
an occurrence because the undisputed evidence showed that Stellar
lacked specific intent to cause harm to a third party The insured also
claimed that the exclusion did not apply because, while the calls were
intentionally placed, the damages were not intentionally caused.
The court reviewed various Florida rulings on the matter and said
that reading the coverage provision of the policy together with the
exclusionary clause could support a conclusion that coverage is
provided for occurrences where the insured did not intend or expect
to cause harm to third parties. In this case, the court found that there
was no evidence to suggest that Stellar intended to cause an injury.
Indeed, the testimony from Stellar’s former owner revealed that he
believed that he had the right to contact businesses and he had a
good faith belief that the automated calls were lawful. The evidence
demonstrated to the court that Stellar was not aware that it was
acting in violation of any law and Old Dominion did not point to any
evidence disputing Stellar’s lack of intent to injure.
Therefore, because Stellar did not intend to cause an injury or
break the law by placing the phone calls, the appeals court ruled that
the trial court did not err in determining that the calls constituted an
occurrence under the terms of the policy.
As for the expected or intended injury exclusion, the court said
that the exclusion is limited to the express terms of the policy and
does not exclude coverage for injuries more broadly deemed under
tort law principles to be consequences flowing from the insured’s
intentional acts. In other words, injury or damage is caused
intentionally within the meaning of an intentional injury exclusion clause
if the insured has acted with the specific intent to cause harm to a
third party. In this instance, the court noted, the damages at issue,
loss of use of the phone lines, were consequences flowing from
Stellar’s intentional acts of placing the phone calls. Evidence showedthat Stellar did not intend to harm the plaintiffs by placing the phone
calls, but rather believed that it was in compliance with the law.
Because the loss of use of the phone lines was not an intentional
injury, the expected or intended injury exclusion does not apply. Old
Dominion Insurance Company v. Stellar Concepts & Design, 189
So.3d 293 (2016)
Exclusions
Athletic Participation Exclusion
At the beginning of 2016 the U.S. District Court for the Western
District of Kentucky ruled that a CGL policy did not provide coverage
for claims stemming from a fatal injury that occurred on Bellarmine
University’s campus during a men’s lacrosse practice because its
Athletic Participants Exclusion Endorsement excluded coverage for
bodily injury “to any person engaged in athletic, exercise, or sports
activities” sponsored by Bellarmine or conducted on the university’s
premises. In its decision, the court pointed out that the policy
excluded bodily injury while engaged in athletic or sports activities and
that the insured “was engaged in such an activity at the time of the
injury.” The court concluded that because Travelers had not
contracted to insure this type of bodily injury, it “did not have a duty to
defend the insured in an action concerning the uncovered injury.” The
case is Underwriters Safety and Claims, Inc. v. Travelers Property
Cas. Co. of America, No. 3:15-CV00183-CRS (W.D. Ky. Jan. 22,
2016)
Pollution Exclusion
The Georgia Supreme Court, reversed an appellate court’s
decision and ruled that personal injury claims allegedly arising from
lead poisoning due to lead-based paint ingestion were excluded from
coverage pursuant to an absolute pollution exclusion in the CGLpolicy. The court disagreed with the appellate court’s conclusion that
lead-based paint was not clearly a “pollutant” as defined by the
policy. The court added that the contractual language of the CGL
policy “unambiguously” governed the factual scenario in this case. It
concluded that under the “broad definition” contained in the policy,
“lead present in paint unambiguously qualified as a pollutant” and “the
plain language” of the policy’s pollution exclusion clause excluded the
claims against the insured from coverage. The case is Georgia Farm
Bureau Mutual Ins., Co. v. Smith, No. S15G1177 (Ga. March 21,
2016).
In Doe Run Resources Corp. v. American Guarantee & Liability
Ins., an appellate court in Missouri ruled that a pollution exclusion in a
CGL policy issued to a mining company conflicted with the policy’s
premium summary and, therefore, did not preclude coverage for toxic
tort lawsuits brought against the mining company. As a result, the
court concluded, the ordinary person of average understanding
purchasing a CGL policy “might reasonably conclude” based on the
language of the policy that it provided coverage for the underlying
lawsuits. Because such a person might reasonably perceive a conflict
between the terms of the policy’s pollution exclusion and its premium
summary, the policy was ambiguous on this issue and it had to
construe the policy terms in favor of coverage for the insured. Doe
Run Resources Corp. v. American Guarantee & Liability Ins., No.
ED103026 (Mo. Ct. App. Sept. 27, 2016).
Field of Entertainment Exclusion
In July, a federal district court in Florida ruled that a “Field of
Entertainment” exclusion contained in an endorsement to a CGL
policy was not enforceable where it excluded all “advertising injury”
coverage and would make the policy’s advertising injury coverage
illusory. The district court concluded that the result should be no
different simply because the exclusion was in an endorsement ratherthan in the policies themselves. The case is Princeton Express and
Surplus Ins. Co. v. DM Ventures USA LLC, No. 15-CV-81685-
MIDDLEBROOKS/BRANDON (S.D. Fla. July 19, 2016)
Liquor Liability
In Attain Specialty Ins. Co. v. Chouteau Property Management,
Inc. a drunk person who had been drinking at a restaurant, shot one
patron and injured another. After the insurance company appealed the
initial decision, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
Illinois ruled that the total liquor liability exclusion and the assault and
battery exclusion in a CGL policy issued to the owner of a building
housing a restaurant precluded coverage for claims that a patron who
had been drinking alcohol shot and killed one person and injured
another. Attain Specialty Ins. Co. v. Chouteau Property Management,
Inc., No. 15-cv-804-JPG-PMF (S.D. Ill. July 27, 2016)
Exclusion from Schedule of Events
After an altercation on the race track, race car driver Kevin Ward
Jr. exited his car and was subsequently, and tragically hit by race car
driver Tony Stewart, causing the death of Ward. A federal district
court in New York ruled that Stewart was not covered under a CGL
policy for a lawsuit by the estate of Ward. In its decision, the district
court found that the CGL policy was “unambiguously limited by the
Schedule of Events endorsement,” which did not include the Empire
Super Sprint event where Mr. Stewart struck Mr. Ward. In order for
this liability to be covered, the event would have had to be listed in
the Schedule of Events endorsement. The case is Axis Ins. Co. v.
Stewart, No. 7:15-CV-1131 (N.D.N.Y. July 29, 2016).
Your WorkIn Cypress Point Condominium Ass’n Inc. v. Adria Towers, L.L.C.
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that consequential damages
allegedly caused by a subcontractors’ faulty workmanship constituted
“property damage,” and the resulting damage, water from rain
flowing into the interior of the property due to subcontractors’
allegedly faulty workmanship, was an “occurrence” under the plain
language of the insurers’ CGL policies. The court reasoned that
because the result of the subcontractors’ allegedly faulty
workmanship, consequential water damage to the completed and
nondefective portions of the condominium, was an “accident,” it was
an “occurrence” under the policies and, therefore, was covered so
long as the other parameters set by the policies were met. The court
observed that the “your work” exclusion in the policies, viewed in
isolation, would seem to eliminate coverage for the water damage to
the completed sections of the condominium. The court pointed out,
however, that the “your work” exclusion contains an exception that
narrows the exclusion by expressly declaring that it did not apply “if
the damaged work or the work out of which the damage arises was
performed on your behalf by a subcontractor” (an exception, the court
pointed out, that was not contained in the prior ISO CGL form). As a
result the court concluded that the association’s claims of
consequential damages caused by the subcontractors’ allegedly
faulty workmanship were covered not only by the insuring
agreements’ initial grant of coverage but also by the subcontractor
exception to the “your work” exclusion. This case is Cypress Point
Condominium Ass’n Inc. v. Adria Towers, L.L.C. (N.J. Aug. 4, 2016).
In Electric Power Systems Int’l, v. Zurich American Ins. Co. a
federal district court in Missouri ruled that a CGL policy did not cover
an insured’s claim for damage that had occurred to a transformer
while the insured was working on it. The district court, ruled that the
policy’s “your work” exclusion applied to the claim and that the policy
provided no coverage. The district court explained in its decision that
policy exclusion j(6) excluded coverage for property damage to a
particular part of any property on which work was performed, if thework was incorrectly performed on it. According to the district court,
the damage for which coverage was sought was exactly the damage
that the insured caused, which would be excluded under j(6). When
the insured (EPS or Electric Power System) worked to remove the
bushing from the transformer, it performed work on the coil’s lead
cable by removing the bolts that attached the lead to the bushing. The
district court then stated that, “It was EPS’s action in failing to detach
the lead from the bushing that caused the lead to be pulled from the
coil, which is the damage for which EPS claims coverage.” The
district court acknowledged that “detach lead cable from bushing”
was not specifically included in its insuring contract, but it found that
the insureds work to detach the lead “was an integral part in
removing the bushing from the transformer.” The court declared that,
disconnecting the lead was “part and parcel of this work”—the
bushing “simply could not have been removed if EPS’s work on the
lead was not properly performed.” Because of this, the district court
ruled that the coil’s lead cable was a “particular part” of the property
on which EPS worked. The court added that because the damage to
the coil had been caused by EPS’s incorrect performance of its work
in detaching the coil’s lead cable from the bushing, exclusion j(6)
applied and there was no coverage for the claimed damage. Electric
Power Systems Int’l, Inc. v. Zurich American Ins. Co., No. 4:15 CV
1171 CDP (E.D. Mo. Sept. 19, 2016).
Before this court are cross-motions for summary judgment
regarding the obligation of the insurer to indemnify the plaintiffs for a
judgment awarded to the plaintiffs against the insured. This case is
Uvino v. Harleysville Worcester Insurance Company, 2015 WL
925940.
The Uvinos hired JBI to help with the construction of their home.
They entered into a construction management agreement wherein JBI
would act as construction manager and the Uvinos would be the
general contractor, hiring all the subcontractors themselves.After some time, the Uvinos fired JBI, claiming that he did material
damage to their home by attempting to alter the work of the
subcontractors. JBI sued the Uvinos to recover outstanding money
allegedly owed to him, and the Uvinos countersued for breach of
contract and other damages. Harleysville insured JBI and agreed to
defend JBI under a reservation of rights.
In a jury trial, the Uvinos found JBI liable for damage to the Uvinos’
home and awarded them over $350,000 in damages. The Uvinos then
started this lawsuit seeking a determination that Harleysville must
indemnify JBI for the underlying and as yet unsatisfied judgment.
The United States District Court, S.D. New York, said that
generally, damages to remedy a contractor’s defective work will not
be covered under a general liability policy like the one issued here;
rather, coverage exists only where the contractor’s defective work
causes harm to others or others’ work. The insurer argued that JBI
acted as a general contractor during the construction of the home and
so, the entire project is deemed to be his work product and the
damages must be excluded from coverage due to the work-product
exclusion. The Uvinos countered that JBI did not take on the role of
general contractor according to the construction agreement and that
his duties were purely advisory in nature.
Based on the facts of the situation, the court found that JBI did
not act as general contractor and so, his work is limited to the
performance of his duties under the construction agreement. Thus, if
JBI acted outside the scope of his contract and in so doing caused
damage to the work of the subcontractors, such damages would not
constitute harm to JBI’s own work and would not be barred from
coverage simply by the policy’s work-product exclusion. The court
ruled that the claims submitted by the Uvinos may include claims
covered under the policy. Basically, the court held that the entire
project could not be seen as his work product. If the court had ruled
otherwise, the policy would not have covered the claims against theinsured due to the work-product exclusion. Uvino v. Harleysville
Worcester Insurance Company, 2015 WL 925940
Assault and Battery Exclusion
Suits were filed by patrons injured in a shooting in a South
Carolinian night club in 2015. After rounds of litigation, the federal
district court in South Carolina has ruled that an insurance company
that issued a CGL policy to a nightclub owner had to defend him
against three identical lawsuits stemming from a shooting at the club
by one shooter, but after examining the complaints’ various
allegations, there was no duty to defend in regards to a fourth
lawsuit. In deciding that the duty to defend applied in three out of the
four cases, the court also decided that the gunfire fell within the CGL
policy’s assault and battery exclusion, but the allegations that the
plaintiffs were each injured by the discharge of a firearm does not
necessarily allege an assault within the meaning of the assault and
battery exclusion. The difference between the policies was that the
fourth action alleges that the shooting arose specifically out of a
dispute, while the other three policies simply alleged that the patrons
were injured by the discharge of a firearm on the premises. Canopius
US Ins., Inc. v. Middleton, No. 2:15-cv-3673-DCN (D.S.C. Aug. 17,
2016).
In a case involving negligence claims resulting from a shooting
outside of a bar, an appellate court in Pennsylvania ruled that an
assault and battery exclusion in the CGL policy issued to the bar
precluded coverage for the negligence claims stemming from the
shooting. The court ruled that “assault and battery” according to the
policy included negligent conduct by the insured or its employees that
resulted in direct harm of another person, even if that negligence was
a failure to prevent assault, negligence related to actual or threatened
assault, or negligence resulting in battery. The court ruled that such
conduct was excluded from coverage, and eventually concluded that
the “myriad allegations presented in the underlying complaint” fellwithin the scope of the definition of “assault and battery” contained in
the exclusion and, therefore, that there was no duty to defend or
indemnify the bar under the facts of the case. The case is QBE Ins.
Corp. v. Walters, No. 1797 MDA 2015 (Penn. Super.Ct. Sept. 9,
2016).
Kinsale Insurance Company brought an action seeking a
declaration that its insurance policy did not require it to defend or
indemnify an insured in a lawsuit arising from an alleged battery. This
case is Kinsale Insurance Company v. Mojoes of Joliet, 2016 WL
3075097.
Mojoes owns, operates, manages, and maintains an
entertainment facility and bar in Joliet. At all times relevant to the
complaint, Saunders was employed by Mojoes as a security guard.
Kiebles was in the bar one night when Saunders allegedly used
physical force and violence to remove Kiebles from the bar, and then
continued to assault and batter him on the public walkway outside of
Mojoes. Kiebles suffered severe injuries and sued Mojoes and
Saunders. Mojoes sought coverage under its policy with Kinsale
Insurance Company. The insurer denied coverage based on the
assault and battery exclusion and filed this declaratory judgment
action.
The United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
said that the assault and battery exclusion is very broad and
specifically precludes coverage of claims for bodily injury related in
any way to an alleged battery. The court also found that the exclusion
prevents coverage of any claim that bodily injury was caused in an
assault or battery due to the negligent hiring, employment, training,
supervision, or retention of any employee of the insured. The court
found that no insured offered any reason why the assault and battery
exclusion should not be enforced under the facts in this case.Therefore, the court concluded that the assault and battery
exclusion applies to the claims alleged in the underlying lawsuit. The
insurer was entitled to a declaration that it is not required to defend
Mojoes or Saunders against any claims or to indemnify them for any
settlements or judgments resulting therefrom. Summary judgment
was granted in favor of Kinsale. The U.S. District Court listed court
rulings from both federal and state courts on the interpretation of the
assault and battery exclusion in support of its decision to apply the
exclusion.
Employer Liability Exclusion
In Vinup v. Joe’s Const., LLC., a laborer was injured on the job
and sought damages from his employer. The CGL policy of the
employer sought a declaratory judgment action that pursuant to the
specific policy exclusions there was no duty to defend and no duty to
pay a judgment rendered against the employer. The Court of Appeals
of Indiana found that for the purposes of the “employers’ liability”
exclusion of the CGL policy, the worker was an employee of the
insured at the time the injuries were suffered, and that laborer was
not a “temporary worker” for insured for purposes of the “employer
liability” exclusion in the CGL policy. Vinup v. Joe’s Const., LLC, No.
58A04-1602-CT-502, 2016 WL 6998291 (Ind. Ct. App. Nov. 30,
2016).
Impaired Property Exclusion
The insured brought an action against its insurer to recover for
breach of the duty to defend and indemnify the insured. In seeking
guidance to determine the outcome of the case, the United States
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit certified questions to the
Supreme Court of Texas. This case is U.S. Metals v. Liberty Mutual
Group, 490 S.W.3d 20 (2015).The insured supplied flanges for use in constructing refinery
processing units. The flanges leaked and had to be replaced to avoid
the risk of fire or explosion. The claimant, ExxonMobil, sued the
insured, U.S. Metals, for $6,345,824 as the cost of replacing the
flanges and for $16,656,000 as damages for the lost use of the
diesel units during the process.
U.S. Metals settled with ExxonMobil and then sought
indemnification from its insurer, Liberty Mutual. The insurer denied
coverage and the insured sued for coverage. The U.S. District Court
entered summary judgment in favor of the insurer and the insured
appealed. On appeal, the Fifth Circuit certified four questions to the
Supreme Court of Texas: in the policy exclusions, are the terms
“physical injury” and/or “replacement” ambiguous; if yes, are the
interpretations of the insured reasonable; if the answer is negative as
to physical injury, does physical injury occur at the moment of
incorporation to the insured’s defective product or does physical injury
occur when there is an alteration in the color, shape, or appearance
of the third party’s product; and lastly, if the answer is negative as to
replacement, does replacement of the defective product irreversibly
attached to a third party’s product include the removal or destruction
of that product?
The Texas Supreme Court noted that the policy covered physical
injury, and this means injury to material things, that is, real and
tangible objects. In this instance, the actual physical injury resulted
not from the installation but from the leaks. Moreover, the leaks from
the flanges never caused injury because ExxonMobil replaced them to
avoid any risk of injury. The court said it agreed with most courts from
around the country that physical injury requires tangible, manifest
harm and does not result merely upon the installation of a defective
component in a product or system. Therefore, the court ruled that the
diesel units were not physically injured merely by the installation of
the faulty flanges.However, the court went on, the units were physically injured in
the process of replacing the faulty flanges. The original welds,
coating, insulation, and gaskets were destroyed in the process and
had to be replaced. This fix necessitated injury to tangible property,
and the injury was unquestionably physical. Thus, the repair costs and
damages for the downtime were property damages covered by the
policy unless the impaired property exclusion applied.
The insured argued that because the flanges were welded in,
restoring the diesel units to use involved much more than simply
removing and replacing the flanges alone and so, the units were not
impaired property as defined in the policy. The Supreme Court
disagreed. The court said that the units were restored to use by
replacing the flanges and were thus impaired property to which the
impaired property exclusion applied. So, their loss of use is not
covered by the policy. The insulation and gaskets destroyed in the
process were not restored to use; they were replaced. They were
therefore not impaired property (by definition) to which the impaired
property exclusion applied and the cost of replacing them was
covered by the policy.
In summary, The Texas Supreme Court rules in this case that
incorporation of faulty flanges did not cause property damage
covered by the policy; that is, incorporating a defective component
into something is not in and of itself physical injury, even though there
is intangible damage, such as diminution in value of loss of use. As for
the application of the impaired property exclusion, the answer
depended on whether the items damaged by the incorporation of the
insured’s faulty product could be restored to use.
Personal and Advertising
An appellate court in New York, affirmed a trial court’s decision,
and ruled that claims asserted in an arbitration demand fell within the
scope of exclusions in CGL insurance policies. The appellate courtadded that, with respect to the breach of contract exclusion, alleged
conduct supporting a tortious interference claim was the same
alleged conduct supporting a breach of contract claim. Thus, it said,
when the arbitration demand was viewed in its entirety, the dispute
between was a contractual dispute, as the “personal and advertising
injury” arose out of a breach of contract. Coverage for the dispute,
therefore, was excluded under insurance policies. The case is Allied
World National Assurance Co. v. Great Divide Ins. Co. (N.Y. App.
Div. 1st Dep’t May 5, 2016).
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled that,
notwithstanding the “knowing violation” exclusion to the personal and
advertising coverage provisions of CGL policies at issue, the insurers
had to defend all claims brought against their insured in privacy-
related lawsuits. This decision is the reverse of a decision by the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of New York. Eventually the
court concluded that because no exclusion barred coverage for the
unjust enrichment claim, and because this was a case where “several
claims [arose] from the same set of facts” and where at least one of
the claims was covered by the policies, the insurers had a duty to
defend the entire actions, including the uncovered claims. National
Fire Ins. Co. of Hartford v. E. Mishan & Sons Inc., No. 15-2248 (2d
Cir. June 1, 2016).
The insurer filed a declaratory judgment action against an
architecture firm seeking a declaration that it had no duty to indemnify
for a copyright infringement. This case is Mid-Continent Casualty
Company v. Kipp Flores Architects, 602 Fed.Appx. 985 (2015).
Kipp Flores obtained a judgment against a builder, Hallmark
Design Homes for copyright infringement for building hundreds of
buildings from its designs without licensing them. Hallmark’s insurer,
Mid-Continent, filed a declaratory judgment action seeking a
declaration that it has no duty to indemnify under its policies. The U.S.District Court ruled in favor of the architecture firm and this appeal
followed.
The United States Court of Appeals, Fifth Circuit, noted that the
insurance policies issued by Mid-Continent generally exclude
coverage for copyright infringement, but that they exempt from the
exclusion an advertising injury arising out of infringement in Hallmark’s
advertisement, as defined in the policies. So the major issue here,
said the court, was whether the underlying judgment, which
established that Hallmark infringed the copyrights of Kipp by
constructing homes from Kipp’s designs without a license to do so,
triggered coverage for an advertising injury under the policy terms.
The court said that the determinative question for coverage is
whether the houses themselves were advertisements such that the
jury verdict potentially gives rise to coverage as an injury arising out
of infringement upon another’s copyright, trade dress or slogan in
Hallmark’s advertisement. The court found that Kipp presented
evidence that the houses themselves were used to attract customers
and Mid-Continent never offered any evidence to the contrary.
Mid-Continent did not dispute the fact that Hallmark used the
infringing homes themselves to market to customers, but then argued
that an infringing house can never be an advertisement as a matter of
law. Mid-Continent argued that under the terms of the policy and
common sense, a house cannot be a notice and it cannot be
broadcast or published in accordance with the terms of the policy
definition of advertisement. The Court of Appeals did not agree.
The court decided that it is undisputed that Hallmark’s primary
means of marketing its construction business was through the use of
the homes themselves, both through model homes and yard signs on
the property of the infringing homes it had built, all of which were
marketed to the general public. The court concluded that the infringing
houses in this case as used by Hallmark all qualify as advertisementsunder the terms of the policies. Because the court concluded that
Hallmark infringed Kipp’s copyright in its advertisement, the policies
define the resulting injury as an advertising injury, that is, an injury
arising out of the infringement in the advertisement. Thus, the
judgment against Hallmark is because of that advertising injury and
under the plain language of the policy, the court ruled, Mid-Continent
owes a duty to indemnify. Mid-Continent Casualty Company v. Kipp
Flores Architects, 602 Fed.Appx. 985 (2015).
Additional Insured and Additional Insurance
In a case where three employees were injured while doing
construction at New York City’s St. George Ferry Terminal in Staten
Island, and the injured employees brought suit against the City of
New York, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New
York ruled that New York City was an additional insured on a CGL
policy obtained by a subcontractor working at the St. George Ferry
Terminal in Staten Island where the subcontractor had a written
agreement with the contractor requiring that it name the city as an
additional insured—even though the city was not a party to that
contract. The case is Liberty Mutual Fire. Ins. Co. v. Zurich
American Ins. Co., No. 14 Civ. 7568 (PAC) (S.D.N.Y. Feb 4, 2016).
In one of the most important CGL decisions of the year, Gilbane
Building Co./TDX Construction Corp. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins.
Co. an appellate court in New York reversed a trial court’s decision,
and ruled that an additional insured clause in a CGL policy issued to a
contractor on a construction project covered only those that had a
written contract “directly with” the contractor. Because the project’s
construction manager did not have a contract directly with the
contractor, it was not an additional insured under the CGL policy it
had obtained. In its decision, the appellate court explained that the
“Additional Insured-By Written Contract” clause of the CGL policy
provided additional insured coverage to “any person or organization
with whom you [Samson] have agreed to add as an additional insuredby written contract.” It then stated that, contrary to the trial court’s
determination, this language “clearly and unambiguously” required
that the named insured execute a contract with the party seeking
coverage as an additional insured. Gilbane Building Co./TDX
Construction Corp. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins. Co. (N.Y. App.
Div. 1st Dep’t Sept. 15, 2016).
In early 2016 the New York Court of Appeals attempted to
answer the question of what is specifically needed for an additional
insured to notify an insurer of an occurrence. The court affirmed an
appellate court’s decision that an additional insured’s letter to the
insured that included the word “claim” and details of the claim, and
requested that the insurer be notified amounted to notice to the
insurer of an “occurrence”—even though the letter did not “expressly”
state that it was seeking coverage as an additional insured. The case
described is Spoleta Construction, LLC v. Aspen Ins. UK Limited
(N.Y. March 24, 2016).
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, reversed a
decision by the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Illinois,
by deciding that where a CGL insurance policy provided the insured
with the ability to orally agree with a third party to add it as an
additional insured, coverage did not depend on the insurer’s issuance
of a certificate of insurance but only on whether the oral agreement
had occurred before the underlying accident for which coverage was
sought. The case is Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Vita Food Products, Inc.,
No. 15-1405 (7th Cir. Dec. 16, 2015).
The general contractor brought an action against the
subcontractor and the subcontractor’s liability insurer seeking a
declaration that it was an additional insured under the subcontractor’s
policy, and that the insurer was obligated to defend it in an underlying
personal injury lawsuit by the subsubcontractor’s employee. This
case is Mecca Contracting v. Scottsdale Insurance Company, 140
A.D.3d 714 (2016).Mecca was the general contractor on a construction project and
hired Salcora Construction to perform certain work on the project.
Mecca entered into a contract with Salcora wherein Salcora agreed
to purchase liability insurance and list Mecca as an additional insured.
Salcora purchased a general liability policy from Scottsdale.
While Mecca was not explicitly named as an additional insured on
this policy, the policy did have a blanket additional insured
endorsement attached. This endorsement provided that any person
or organization whom Salcora was required to add as an additional
insured on the policy pursuant to a written contract would be
considered an additional insured under the policy. The policy provided
Salcora with primary coverage and the blanket additional insured
endorsement provided any additional insured with excess coverage
unless a written contract specifically required that the Scottsdale
policy be primary. It is undisputed that the contract between Mecca
and Salcora expressly states that the Scottsdale policy would be
primary.
A worker for a subsubcontractor hired by Salcora on the project
site was injured when his hand became trapped under a fire escape
ladder. He sued Mecca and others and Mecca sought coverage
under the Scottsdale policy. The insurer disclaimed coverage and
Mecca brought this action, seeking a declaration that the insurer was
obligated to provide a defense. The Supreme Court, Kings County,
granted summary judgment to Mecca and the insurer appealed.
The Supreme Court, Appellate Division, Second Department, New
York, noted that Mecca established its prima facie entitlement to the
declaration sought by simply submitting its contract with Salcora. In
that contract, Salcora agreed to make Mecca an additional insured.
The policy provided primary coverage to Salcora and under the
blanket additional insured endorsement, Scottsdale agreed to provide
primary coverage to any party with whom Salcora entered into a
contract if such contract specifically required the Scottsdale policy tobe primary. Since the policy provided Salcora with primary coverage
and Salcora agreed to make Mecca an additional insured, the
contract between Mecca and Salcora constituted a contract requiring
Scottsdale to provide Mecca with primary coverage, and satisfied the
requirement of the blanket additional insured endorsement.
The opinion of the trial court was affirmed. Mecca was an
additional insured entitled to primary coverage under the Scottsdale
policy.
Classification of Worker
In a wrongful death case in Texas the judgment against insurers
skyrocketed from over $37 million, to over $71 million, and ultimately
plummeted to $0. The Texas Supreme Court has ruled that claims of
parents of a derrick hand killed in an accident at work were not
covered by the drilling company’s CGL policy and, therefore, that
they could not recover the 71 million dollar judgment they had
obtained in a second jury trial against the insurers. After their son
was killed when a hydraulic lift drilling rig collapsed with him on it, the
family made several attempts to settle with the insurer, but the claim
had listed the deceased as an employee as the company when he
was in fact legally a leased worker. Because there was specific
language excluding a leased worker from coverage under the CGL
policy, the insurer’s refusal to settle was rightful and the deceased
workers family recovered nothing. The case is Seger v. Yorkshire
Ins. Co., Ltd., No. 13-0673 Tex. June 17, 2016).
Bad Faith and Collusion
In one of the most important CGL decisions in the last year,
Carpenters v. Lovell’s Lounge and Grill, LLC. an appellate court in
Indiana, affirmed a trial court’s decision by ruling that an insurance
company was not bound by a $1,125,000 consent judgment reached
by its insured, a lounge and grill, with a customer who alleged that hehad been assaulted there. In its decision, the appellate court found
that even though the insurer had not defended the lounge under a
reservation of rights and had not filed a declaratory judgment action
before the consent judgment had been approved, if the consent
judgment was the product of bad faith or collusion, it did not bind the
insurer. Since Indiana courts had not previously addressed what was
necessary to establish bad faith or collusion in the context of an
insured’s attempt to get a consent judgment, the court then decided
that the insurer, claiming that the consent judgment was a product of
bad faith or collusion, had the burden to prove by clear and convincing
evidence that the consent judgment had been procured by bad faith
or collusion. The appellate court then listed some indicators of bad
faith and collusion in connection with a settlement agreement including
“unreasonableness, misrepresentation, concealment, secretiveness,
lack of serious negotiations on damages, attempts to affect the
insurance coverage, profit to the insured, and attempts to harm the
interest of the insurer.” The court also stipulated that not all of these
considerations had to be found in every case of bad faith or collusion,
and that there might be other considerations, but that the list was a
“good starting point” for determining whether the consent judgment in
this case had been procured by bad faith or collusion.
The appellate court decided that there was “clear and convincing
evidence” that the consent judgment had been obtained in bad faith or
collusion. Carpenters v. Lovell’s Lounge and Grill, L.L.C, No. 33A01-
1602-CT-265 (Ind. Ct. App. Sept. 8, 2016).
Ongoing Operations Provision
At the end of 2016 the Oregon Supreme Court affirmed an
appellate court decision that an insurer had a duty to defend an
additional insured under its CGL policy. Despite this ruling, the court
specifically did not determine whether the policy’s “ongoing
operations” provision required that covered damages must have
occurred before the additional insured had completed its work. Thecourt held that the insureds allegations could result in a general
contractor being held liable for the damages covered by the CGL,
and therefore the insurer had a duty to defend the general contractor
under the four-corners rule. West Hills Development Co. v. Chartis
Claims, Inc., No. SC S063823 (Ore. Dec. 8, 2016).
Continuous Trigger Theory
In Columbia Cas. Co. v. Plantation Pipe Line Co., an appellate
court in Georgia declined to adopt the continuous trigger policy when
they found that the terms of a 1976 excess insurance policy did not
warrant adoption of the theory in an environmental contamination
case. The continuous trigger theory is the idea that a long-tail injury is
deemed to have “occurred” at every point of time at which there was
contributing damage or injury. In its decision, the court explained that
even if it were inclined to adopt the continuous trigger theory,
application of that theory was premised on the assumption that the
policy in place contained language that limited coverage to property
damage that took place during the policy period. The appellate court
stated that, unlike more contemporary standard CGL policies, the
policy in question and other provisions that were expressly
incorporated did not provide that the policy applied only to property
damage that occurred during the policy period. Columbia Cas. Co. v.
Plantation Pipe Line Co., No. A16A0705 (Ga. Ct. App. Aug. 31,
2016).
Loss of Use
In Drake Williams Steel, Inc., v. Continental Cas. Co., the
Nebraska Supreme Court ruled that CGL policies did not cover an
insured’s costs to cure its improperly manufactured product, which
was used in the construction of an arena, where there was no
damage to any part of the arena. There was no coverage under the
CGL policies, according to the court, because the costs for which
reimbursement was sought were not derived from any physicaldamage to the affected property or temporary loss of use and there
was no property damage. Drake Williams Steel, Inc., v. Continental
Cas. Co., Nos. S-15-445, S-15-446 (Neb. Aug. 5, 2016)
“Other Insurance” Violation of Public Policy
An appellate court in California, reversed a trial court’s decision
and ruled that enforcement of an “other insurance” clause in a primary
CGL policy violated public policy—w hether or not the clause was in
the policy’s “coverage” section alone or also in its “limitations”
section. Certain Underwriters at Lloyds, London v. Arch Specialty
Ins. Co., No. C072500 (Cal. Ct. App. April 11, 2016).
Malicious Prosecution
An appellate court in Georgia ruled that in cases where a policy
does not specifically state the trigger for malicious prosecution,
insurance coverage is triggered on a potential claim for malicious
prosecution “when the insured sets in motion the legal machinery of
the state.” The case is Zook v. Arch Specialty Ins. Co., Nos.
A15A2006, A16A0467 (Ga. Ct. App. March 25, 2016).
Professional Services
In March, 2016 the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of
California ruled that pilot car services, which is a car service that
provides an escort for a larger vehicle and checks the road ahead for
danger, for oversized loads, were “professional services” within the
meaning of a professional services exclusion in a CGL insurance
policy. The case is Atain Specialty Ins. Co. v. Szetela, No. 2:14-cv-
02991-KJM-KJN (E.D. Cal. March 23, 2016).
General AggregateGenerally when terms are undefined in a policy, the court turns to
the Webster dictionary definition of the word. When ambiguity exists
in a policy, it is generally interpreted in favor of the insured. In a
recent court case, the Montana Supreme Court ruled that the
commonly used, yet still undefined, term “general aggregate” was
ambiguous in a commercial transportation insurance policy and, as a
result, the maximum amount that could potentially apply, applied to all
coverages under the entire policy. The case is Westchester Surplus
Lines Ins. Co. v. Keller Transport, Inc., No. DA 14-0278 (Mont. Jan.
12, 2016).
Cyber Coverage
In Superior Fuels, Inc. v. Nationwide Agribusiness Ins. Co., a
federal district court in Illinois ruled that claims the insured faced
arising from the purchase of fuel with invalidated renewable
identification numbers (RINs) were not covered by commercial
property, CGL, or commercial umbrella policies because the RINs
were “intangible property” and not “covered property.” The district
court reasoned that “property damage” under the policies excluded
intangible property and did not apply to RINs. Superior Fuels, Inc. v.
Nationwide Agribusiness Ins. Co., No. 14-cv-1420-SMY-PMF (S.D.
Ill. Aug. 16, 2016).
In likely the most important case of 2016, the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed a decision by the U.S. District
Court for the Eastern District of Virginia that a CGL insurer was
obligated to defend its insured in a class action complaint alleging a
data breach that resulted in the underlying plaintiffs’ private medical
records being available on the internet for over four months. The
district court concluded, and the Fourth Circuit court affirmed, that the
complaint “at least potentially or arguably” alleged a “publication” of
private medical information by Portal that constituted conduct covered
under the policies. The district court said that that conduct, if proven,
would have given “unreasonable publicity to, and disclose[d]information about, patients’ private lives,” because any member of the
public with an internet connection could have viewed the plaintiffs’
private medical records during the time the records were available
online. Whether or not the information was viewed by third parties
was deemed irrelevant. The case is Travelers Indemnity Co. of
America v. Portal Healthcare Solutions, L.L.C., No. 14-1944 (4th Cir.
April 11, 2013).
Car Wash Damages
The insurer brought an action seeking a declaratory judgment that
it had no duty to defend or indemnify the insured car wash installer in
an underlying lawsuit arising from a malfunctioning car wash. This
case is Auto-Owners Insurance Company v. Southeastern Car Wash
Systems, 184 F.Supp.3d 625 (2016).
Miller operates a car wash distribution and installation business in
Tennessee. Miller was insured through a general liability policy issued
by Auto-Owners. Miller contracted with Evans to install and maintain
a car wash unit; after installation, the car wash began to malfunction.
This caused damage both to the unit and customers’ autos. Evans
incurred substantial losses, including damage to the car wash unit,
lost income, reputational damage, and payments to customers for the
damage done to their cars.
Evans sued Miller seeking compensation and Miller sought
coverage from Auto-Owners. The insurer filed this declaratory
judgment action.
The United States District Court for the Eastern District of
Tennessee noted the wording of the general liability policy as to the
insuring agreement and said it had to see if the complaints against
the insured met the insuring agreement language. The court saw
three claims that it said it would examine.The first claim was for damage to the car wash. The insurer did
not contest this claim.
The second claim was for loss profits due to loss of use of the car
wash. Auto-Owners argued that this was an economic loss, not
property damage as defined in the policy. The court responded that
the insurer’s argument would essentially read the phrase “all resulting
loss of use” out of the definition of property damage as it appears in
the policy. Thus, the court declined to hold that a claim for lost income
as a result of loss of use of damaged property does not fall within the
scope of property damage as defined in the policy.
The third claim was for payments to customers for vehicle
damage. Auto-Owners argued that these payments are economic
losses that Evans voluntarily incurred by paying unknown third-parties
for damage to their vehicles. The court did agree with Auto-Owners
that the payments represents economic, rather than tangible, losses,
but the court continued, this does not mean that the payments are not
covered by the policy. The court pointed out that the insuring
agreement states that the insurer will defend the insured against
lawsuits seeking damages because of property damage. This meant
to the court that it was not a stretch to conclude that payments made
by a business to cover damage to its customers’ vehicles are made
on account of the damage, or that the payments follow as a
consequence of that damage. The court concluded that a
straightforward reading of the policy does not, as a matter of law,
foreclose the possibility that the claim gives rise to a duty to defend.
Having found that three of the claims alleged against the insured
are within the bounds of the policy’s coverage, the court then
examined the policy for any possible applicable exclusions. Auto-
Owners points to two exclusions that it believes apply to Evans’s
claim for damage to the car wash unit: the Your Work Exclusion and
the Your Product Exclusion.The court ruled that the allegations satisfy the conditions of the
Your Work Exclusion. Miller’s installation of the car wash constitutes
work performed by the insured; the car wash installation had been
completed; the car wash sustained damage arising out of some
aspect of the unit or its installation; and all of these vents took place
on the premises of Evans’s service station. Any claim for damages to
the car wash itself is thus excluded from coverage under the policy.
As for the Your Product Exclusion, the court found that the car
wash fitted comfortably within the policy definition of “your product”.
Accordingly, the physical damage to the car wash is excluded from
the coverage for property damage and so, Evans’s claim seeking
recovery for damage to the car wash is precluded.
In conclusion, because Auto-Owners failed to show that all of the
claims alleged against Miller in the underlying complaint are
unambiguously outside the scope of coverage provided by the policy,
and thus, has failed to establish as a matter of law that Auto-Owners
has no duty to defend Miller against the claims, the court denied the
insurer’s motion for summary judgment.
This case is presented for the court’s extensive examination of the
issues that arise when a car wash damages vehicles. Lost profits and
payments to customers for vehicle damage resulting from a car
wash’s malfunctioning are all discussed by the court and case law
from Tennessee, Texas, the 9th Circuit, Minnesota, and Washington is
cited. Auto-Owners Insurance Company v. Southeastern Car Wash
Systems, 184 F.Supp.3d 625 (2016).
Limited Liability Company Coverage
This is an appeal from the U.S. District Court for the District of
South Carolina. This case is Pennsylvania National Mutual Casualty
Insurance Company v. Lewis, 650 Fed.Appx. 159 (2016).The insurer, Pennsylvania National Mutual brought a declaratory
judgment action against its insured, Roger Lewis and his wife and his
solely owned company, Excel Mechanical, seeking a declaration that
it had no duty to defend or indemnify the insured in a bodily injury
claim.
The underlying action arose out of a claim filed by Mrs. Lewis
against Excel and her husband in which she alleges that she was
injured in a boating accident involving a watercraft owned and
operated by Mr. Lewis. Mrs. Lewis alleges that there were two other
passengers on the boat at the time of the accident, and Mr. Lewis
was entertaining these passengers as business prospects. Thus, she
claimed, Mr. Lewis was engaged in the conduct of Excel’s business
and so, Excel was vicariously liable for Mr. Lewis’s actions.
Six months after the accident, Mr. Lewis filed a claim with Penn
National, reporting that he was in the boat with potential customers at
the time of the accident and that the trip was therefore a business-
related activity covered by his company’s policy with Penn National.
The coverage under the policy designated a limited liability company
as an insured, with members also being insureds with respect to the
conduct of the business and managers being insureds with respect to
their duties as managers.
Penn National filed a declaratory judgment action, maintaining that
the boat trip was not business-related and that Lewis was only
claiming it was to obtain coverage. The U.S. District Court concluded
that the Penn National policy was unambiguous and that at the time of
the trip and resulting accident, Mr. Lewis was operating the boat in
the course of his employment and with respect to the conduct of
Excel’s business as required for coverage under the policy. Penn
Mutual appealed.
The United States Court of Appeals, Fourth Circuit, reviewed the
controlling law and the arguments of the parties and affirmed thedistrict court ruling.
This case is presented to highlight the status of a limited liability
company and its members and managers as insureds. Mr. Lewis
owned the limited liability company and was the manager of the
business, and his actions at the time of the accident were seen by the
court as business-related. The court found that the fact that the trip
included or may have included elements of familial entertainment and
friendly fellowship did not deprive the trip of its business purpose.
Pennsylvania National Mutual Casualty Insurance Company v.
Lewis, 650 Fed.Appx. 159 (2016).
Request for Reimbursement of Defense Cost
This case arises from a professional liability insurance policy
issued by Columbia Casualty Company to Mostafa Abdou. The court
ruled that there was no coverage. However, that court did not
address Columbia’s request for reimbursement of defense costs. So,
the insurer filed a motion seeking reimbursement of defense costs.
This case is Columbia Casualty Company v. Abdou, 2016 WL
4417711.
The United States District Court, S.D. California, said that Abdou’s
interpretation of a loss sets forth the expenses that the insured might
be liable for as a result of a claim, and that the insurer will be
required to reimburse if the claim is covered. An insured might be
liable for settlements or judgments against him and if the claim is
covered under the policy, the insurer will have to pay. However, the
court continued, the insurer is not required to pay for the loss if the
policy excludes coverage. This means the insurer’s liability for any
monetary settlement or judgments is eliminated and this includes
defense costs. There was no potential for coverage in the underlying
case against Abdou and so, there was no need for Columbia to pay
for the defense.The insurer’s motion for relief was granted. Abdou was required
to reimburse Columbia in the amount of $273,923.56. The U.S.
District Court rules in this instance that the insurer did not contract to
pay defense costs for claims that are not even potentially covered.
The court noted that California law clearly allows insurers to be
reimbursed for defense costs paid in defending insureds against
claims for which there is no obligation to defend.
The underlying point being made by this court is that the insured
has been enriched through the insurer’s bearing of unbargained-for
defense costs, and this enrichment must be deemed unjust. An
insurer that properly reserves its rights is entitled to reimbursement of
defense costs it never owed as a matter of law, and this is true even
where the policy does not provide for reimbursement.
The insurer sought a declaration that it did not owe a defense or
indemnity to its insured after the insured was sued in a bodily injury
claim. The claim was settled before the declaratory action was
decided, with the insurer paying $125,000 in the settlement. The
insurer eventually prevailed in the declaratory judgment action and
now seeks reimbursement for the amount it paid on the insured’s
behalf. This case is American Western Home Insurance Company v.
Donnelly Distribution, 2015 WL 505407.
Before a trial began, the case was settled, with the insurer paying
$125,000 on behalf of Donnelly. As for the declaratory judgment
action, the insurer was eventually victorious in its request. The insurer
then filed this lawsuit seeking reimbursement for the amount it paid
for the settlement of the underlying lawsuit based on an unjust
enrichment theory. The insured countered that American Western
voluntarily paid the settlement and so, no reimbursement was
required.The United States District Court for the Eastern District of
Pennsylvania noted that Pennsylvania courts have endorsed the
general doctrine prohibiting recovery for voluntary payments made
due to a mistake of law. The court also noted the existence of cases
forbidding an insurer from recovering the costs of defending a lawsuit
against an insured and forbidding an insurer from recovering a
settlement payment made by an insurer. However, the court
concluded that Pennsylvania law permitted an insurer that makes a
settlement payment on its insured’s behalf to assert an unjust
enrichment claim for reimbursement if it is determined after the
payment is made that the insurer was not obligated to make the
payment under the terms of the insurance policy.
The court said that, to prevail on an unjust enrichment theory, the
insurer must establish the following: it did not make the payment due
to a mistake of law; the insured was on notice at the time of payment
that the obligation to pay was disputed; the insurer did not make the
payment primarily to protect its own interest; and, permitting
reimbursement under the circumstances would not upset the delicate
incentive structure inherent in the insurer/insured relationship. Based
on these items, the court concluded that American Western was
entitled to reimbursement in this instance. American Western Home
Insurance Company v. Donnelly Distribution, 2015 WL 505407.A p p e n d i c e s
A:  GL Policy Jacket Provisions
1973 Comprehensive General Liability Form
Broad Form Comprehensive General Liability Endorsement
B:  Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 01 12 07
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 02 12 07
C:  Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 01 04 13
Commercial General Liability Coverage Form—CG 00 02 04 13
D:  Commercial General Liability Declarations—C G DS 01 10 01
E:  Common Policy Conditions—IL 00 17 11 98
F:  Commercial Liability Umbrella Coverage Form—CU 00 01 04 13
G:  Commercial Excess Liability Coverage Form—CX 00 01 04 13
H:  Legal Status of Punitive Damages Insurability
Liquor Liability
Premises Liability
Dram Shop LawsI:    Checklists—C GL Coverage and Commercial Umbrella and
Excess Liability CoverageAppendix H
Legal Status of Punitive
Damages Insurability
Chart Presents State-by-State Policy with Case
Citations
This chart presents the status of punitive damages awards, in
each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. For
each jurisdiction, the chart shows whether punitive damages are (1)
insurable; (2) noninsurable; (3) insurable as to vicarious liability; (4)
not recognized; and (5) undetermined. Precedent setting court
citations establishing the state’s position are included.
It should be kept in mind that the states’ positions on the
insurability of punitive damages awards are not positively or
permanently set; varying circumstances may produce seemingly
inconsistent outcomes and positions may be overturned by
subsequent rulings. The chart is based on the most recent information
available.*   In these states, question of insurability of vicarious liability has not been determined but
since the direct imposition of punitive damages is insurable, indirect imposition of such
damages through vicarious liability is also presumed to be insurable.
1.  Note – Punitive damages are not typically recoverable in Massachusetts ( ), stating punitive
damages are only recoverable as provided by statute. The Massachusetts Supreme Court
has recognized the insurability of “double damages” as classified by statute. CAN Ins. Co.
v. Sliski, 744 N.E.2d.
2.  Differing authority in the N.D.Texas in Hartford Cas. Ins. Co. v. Powell, 19 F.Supp2d 678
(N.D.Tex. 1998).
Liquor Liability
General Discussion of the Liquor Liability
Exclusion and Related Issues
The liquor liability exposure is not meant to be insured under the
standard general liability policy. The standard (ISO) CGL policy and
many independently filed liability forms contain a liquor liability
exclusion precluding coverage for damages arising out of the sale or
furnishing of liquor if the seller or provider is in the alcoholic
beverages business. Insureds in the alcoholic beverages industry
need specific liquor liability. The liquor liability exclusion has been the
frequent subject of coverage misunderstandings, arguments, and
litigation, mainly centered around, but not limited to, the meaning of
the phrase “in the business.” Who is affected by the exclusion andwhat activities it reaches depends upon the version of the exclusion
included in a policy (there are a few different versions in use, due to
the frequent revision of the CGL policy), the laws of the jurisdiction
(as the exclusion reaches liability imposed due to state law or liquor
regulation), and how the courts of the jurisdiction have interpreted the
pertinent exclusion’s scope. This article presents a discussion of
these issues.
Versions of the Exclusion
The liquor liability exclusion eliminates coverage for bodily injury or
property damage where the insured is held liable for damages
because the insured caused or contributed to the intoxication of any
person, furnished alcoholic beverages to a minor or person under the
influence of alcohol, or violated an alcoholic beverages law or
regulation.
There are different versions of the liquor liability exclusion in
current use—the exclusion as it appears in the 1973 comprehensive
general liability policy, the version that is a part of the 1986
commercial general liability policy, and the two optional variations,
adopted in 1989, available for use with the general liability program.
The standard policy provision as contained in the 1996 CGL form is
identical to the 1986 version, but may be modified with the 1989
endorsements at the insurer’s option. In 1989, ISO decided to
replace the liquor liability exclusion in the 1986 liability form but, in a
compromise with the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners, instead provided two amendatory endorsements
changing the basic policy’s liquor exclusion. These versions—and the
effect of their differences—are discussed later. No changes were
made to the exclusion in the 2001 version of the CGL policy, or in the
December 2004 version, or in the December 2007 version. The April
2013 version of the CGL form changed the policy to address “Bring
Your Own” establishments as well as certain court decisions with
respect to claims of negligence by an insured. The April 2013 versionof the form will be discussed later in this article. The other additions
to the exclusion—(a) and (b)—don’t alter the basic professional
intent, but instead just inforce the existing intent. (The 1973 version is,
of course, superseded by later policies; however, many long-tail
exposures are covered by the terms of that insuring contract and so a
discussion of its language remains relevant.)
Changes April, 2013
With an increase in “Bring Your Own” facilities, restaurants and
other businesses where the patrons are invited to bring their own
alcohol to the premises, there have been increased questions about
where the liability lies if an intoxicated person harms another person
or property. In a regular restaurant or bar setting, the liquor liability
exclusion will probably apply.
There are a few types of Bring Your Own establishments:
(1)    Customers simply bring their own beer, wine, or liquor to
the eating establishment. The establishment provides food
and nonalcoholic beverages, and whomever would like
something alcoholic will have to drink from their own
personal stash.
(2)    Same as example above, but the establishment may
provide cups, glasses, ice, or mixers for the alcoholic
beverages.
(3)    Same as the first example except the establishment allows
the server to take the mixed drinks or beverages and
serves it to the rest of the table.
(4)    The customer brings in a bottle, typically wine, and
delivered to the designated server or wine steward. Thesteward then serves the wine to the party as if the wine
came from the restaurant’s own cellar.
(5)    Any of the above four examples, but when a fee is
charged for the services provided.
Generally liquor liability will eliminate coverage when an insured is
“in the businesses” of manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving, or
furnishing alcoholic beverages. The question that arises is to what
extent are insureds “in the business of” manufacturing, distributing,
selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages when they
participate in one or more of the activities listed above as a BYO
establishment. ISO made a revision to the Liquor Liability Exclusion in
both the occurrence and claims made versions of the CGL and
Products/Completed Operations Liability Coverage forms in order to
address this issue.
Simmons v. Homatas, is a case involving a night club that did not
serve alcohol but allowed patrons to bring alcoholic beverages out
with them. In the end, the court stated that a club operator is not in
the business of selling liquor if the club does not provide alcohol, even
if it provides glasses and ice to patrons. Simmons v. Homatas, 925
N.E.2d 1089 (Ill.2010). ISO specifically referenced Simmons v.
Homatas when implementing the changes to the liquor liability
exclusion. In response to this case, ISO revised the liquor liability
policy to provide that for purposes of the exclusion permitting a
person to bring alcoholic beverages for consumption on an insured’s
premises (a Bring Your Own establishment), whether or not a fee is
charged or a license is required for the activity, is not by itself
considered the business of selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages.
ISO made other changes so the liquor liability exclusion now
explicitly states that the exclusion applies even if the claims against
the insured allege the negligence or other wrongdoing in (1)
supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of others; or(2) providing or failing to provide transportation with respect to any
person that may be under the influence of alcohol. These changes
were made in response to two court cases in particular. In Penn-
America Insurance Co. v. Peccadillos, the court ruled that a duty to
defend was triggered under the CGL policy when an insured was
alleged to have continued to serve visibly intoxicated patrons and then
ejected them from the premises in an extremely inebriated condition.
The two entered their vehicle and drove away from the establishment
causing an accident that resulted in death and serious bodily injury of
the passengers of the other vehicle. The insured argued that the
allegations fell outside of the CGL liquor liability exclusion. The
insured overserved the defendants, and then ejected them from the
establishment when the insured knew or should have known that they
would attempt to drive home. Penn-America Ins. Co. v. Peccadillos,
27 A> 3d 259 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2011). In McGuire v. Curry the court
generally ruled that the employer should be held liable for actions of
an intoxicated underage employee when the employer allowed the
employee unsupervised and unrestricted access to alcoholic
beverages, as it is foreseeable that an underage employee with no
supervision and free access to alcohol at work could abuse the
available alcohol and cause bodily injury or property damage as a
result of his intoxication.
With regards to the changes referring to BYO establishments,
they could be considered to be a broadening of coverage, while the
rest of the changes to the liquor liability exclusion implemented in
April, 2013 effectively narrow coverage by specifically allowing the
exclusion to apply even if the claims against an insured allege
negligence in supervision, hiring, employment, training or monitoring of
others, or providing or failing to provide transportation with respect to
any person that may be under the influence of alcohol.
Exclusion Generally UpheldAlthough initially the liquor exclusion in general liability policies was
attacked as ambiguous, almost no courts have agreed with this
criticism. Although slightly aged, the following are examples of cases
depicting valid case law in which the exclusion has been upheld.
Curbee, Ltd. v. Rhubart, 594 A.2d 733 (Pa. Super. 1991) (“it is of no
consequence, in interpreting the exclusion, that the alcohol provided
was consumed away from the licensed premises or that it was not
directly served by an owner or employee of the restaurant. When the
restaurant provided the alcohol for consumption, the exclusion was
triggered. Its effect was to relieve [the insurer] of the obligation to
defend or indemnify”); and Thornhill v. Houston General Lloyds, 802
S.W.2d 127 (Tex. App. 1991) (insureds argued that the suit alleged
the negligent training of employees, and not the providing of liquor, as
the cause of liability and that the insurer could not rely on the liquor
exclusion to deny coverage; the court stated, “the defendants ask this
court to construe the language of the policy such that their liability
could attach as a result of some separate, additional reckless or
wanton conduct and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Such a
construction would constitute a misconstruction of the clearly worded
policy terms.” The outcome of this case would be different if it were
litigated today, due to the changes in the liquor exclusion from April
2013.
Another case which illustrates a similar argument (i.e., that a
separate and independent cause of action exists for negligent
supervision of employees which is not reached by the liquor
exclusion) is Kelly v. Lee’s Old Fashioned Hamburgers, 896 F.2d
923 (5th Cir. 1990). Again, the court refused the argument, holding
the liquor exclusion valid to deny coverage for the incident.
Even where the insureds argued that they requested full coverage
and the insurance agent had knowledge that the insured’s business
involved the sale of liquor, the exclusion was given full force in denying
coverage for damages arising out of the sale of alcoholic beverages.
The court stated, “All that the agent did was to take an order forinsurance. Liability for the negligent sale of alcohol is a risk for which
a commercial establishment would likely want to be insured.
However, an insurance customer has the responsibility to make
specific insurance needs known to the insurance company” in
DeJonge v. Mutual of Enumclaw, 800 P.2d 313 (Ore. App. 1990).
Similarly, in Sprangers v. Greatway Insurance Co., 498 N.W.2d
858 (Wisc. App. 1993), the court held the exclusion valid against an
argument that the insurance agent had a duty to point out the
exclusion in a general liability policy. The court held the agent had no
such duty to advise the insured about the exclusions in the absence of
a request.
Effect of the Exclusion
All the versions of the exclusion eliminate coverage where the
insured has caused or contributed to the intoxication of any person,
has furnished alcoholic beverages to a minor or an already intoxicated
person, or has violated any statute or regulation pertaining to
alcoholic beverages. The part of the exclusion that varies among the
versions is to whom the exclusion may apply. This is discussed under
“Liquor Exclusion—Who is Affected?”
Because the exclusion is tied to statutes and regulations, and in
some instances, the principles of common law, the scope of the
exclusion varies in different jurisdictions.
The problem stems from three factors: (1) dram shop acts of
some states impose specific statutory liability upon businesses in the
alcoholic beverages industry; (2) alcoholic beverage control laws of
other states create liability under certain circumstances in absence of
dram shop laws; and (3) common law liability or liability imposed in
the absence of specific statutory treatment exists. In any
circumstances, the liquor liability exclusion is broad enough toeliminate coverage in situations (1) and (2), and, depending upon the
circumstances, in (3). What may be a statutory violation in one state
may not be actionable in another. This leaves insureds even
tangentially connected to manufacturing, distributing, selling, or
serving liquor with serious questions about their liability insurance
coverage, and perhaps a need for separate liquor liability insurance.
Dram Shop Acts
Dram shop acts, or civil damage acts, give persons a civil right of
action against providers of alcoholic drinks when they are injured or
their property is damaged through the actions of an intoxicated
person or a minor. (Just as a point of information, the first dram shop
law was enacted by Wisconsin in 1849.) As will be shown, some
statutes also give a right of action when a person’s source of support
is reduced or eliminated. The dram shop acts of different states vary
in assessing liability, some narrowly defining causes, actions, and
damages, and others doing so more broadly.
Another type of civil damage act, discussed below in “Statutes
Avoiding Liability,” legislatively enacts the common law principle that it
is the consumption, and not the sale or furnishing, of liquor that is the
legal cause of liquor-related incidents and damage. This puts the
responsibility for damage on the intoxicated person, and not on the
person furnishing the liquor. Exceptions are commonly recognized
where liquor is furnished to a minor or visibly intoxicated person.
An example of a traditional dram shop act is Connecticut’s (Conn.
Gen. Stat. §30-102), which states that any person who “by such
person or such person’s agent” sells any alcoholic beverages to an
intoxicated person is liable for damages to injured third parties in an
amount up to $250,000 per person injured or to persons injured in
consequence up to $250,000 aggregate.The dram shop act of Colorado (Colo. Rev. Stat. §13-21-103)
imposes no restrictions on the amount of damages, and provides that
the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages works a forfeiture of all rights
of a renter under any lease or contract on the premises. However,
the act applies only to sales to habitual drunkards, and specifies that
no liability can attach unless a spouse, child, parent, guardian, or
employer has first notified the vender by written or printed notice not
to sell or give away intoxicating liquors to that party.
Illinois has a very broad liquor control act (235 ILCS 5/6-21). It
gives a specific cause of action to any person who suffers bodily
injury or property damage against any licensed seller of liquor, who,
through sale or furnishing, causes the intoxication of a person. This
act also creates a cause of action against anyone twenty-one or
older who rents a hotel room knowing the room will be used for
underage drinking in favor of persons injured by intoxicated underage
drinkers.
An important variation in dram shop laws for insurance
professionals dealing with landlords of premises where alcoholic
beverages are served is also illustrated by the Illinois dram shop law.
This act allows any person owning, renting, leasing, or permitting the
occupation of any premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages
to be held liable along with operators of such premises. Note that of
the various versions of the liquor exclusion, only the exclusion as
included in the 1973 CGL form would eliminate coverage for owners
or lessors of liquor-related businesses; the later versions have been
revised on this point.
Not every person who suffers injuries or damages directly or
indirectly as a result of an intoxicated person’s actions has a right of
action; it depends upon the provisions of these acts. Some acts
specifically state that only the injured person or his or her spouse and
children are eligible, while others also add the parent, guardian, and
sometimes even the employer of the insured person. The broadesttype of provision gives every person a right of action for bodily injury,
property damage, or loss of support.
Dram shop acts were not devised for the benefit of the intoxicated
person who is injured as the result of his own acts. A few
jurisdictions, though, have allowed such actions under common law
negligence principles; (See “Recovery by Intoxicated Persons.”)
A Connecticut case that demonstrates this intent is Nolan v.
Morelli, 226 A.2d 383 (Conn. 1967). This case involved an action by
a woman who sought to recover damages for the death of her
intoxicated husband, who was killed in a single-car accident. She
claimed that his death was caused by his intoxication which, in turn,
was caused by the restaurant owner’s sale of liquor to him.
By its terms, the civil damage act of Connecticut authorizes
recovery when a person is injured or his property is damaged by an
intoxicated person. But the court held that the law does not authorize
recovery for injuries or damages sustained by the intoxicated
purchaser. Since the decedent had no cause of action under this act,
there was none that could pass to his administratrix.
The Nolan holding was followed by the Delaware Supreme Court
in Wright v. Moffitt, 437 A.2d 554 (Del. 1981), a case in which a
patron attempted to recover from a tavern keeper for injuries caused
through the patron’s own intoxication. The patron argued that the
court should reevaluate the traditional stand on this issue and impose
liability as an expansion of the law. The court held that if such an
expansion was desirable, it should be done by the legislature.
As noted, there are some dram shop acts that grant a person a
right of action when means of support are lost. In these jurisdictions it
is possible, therefore, for the intoxicated person’s spouse or theminor’s parent to obtain a right of action against those responsible for
causing or contributing to the intoxication of that person.
This right of action—given to those persons specified under the
dram shop acts—generally lies against the operator of the business
where alcoholic beverages are given, served, or sold, and sometimes
upon the owner or lessor of such premises. The fact that an
employee or agent of the operator may have served the alcohol does
not relieve the operator of ultimate responsibility. In some states, only
the person who causes the intoxication of another is held liable. All
versions of the CGL liquor liability exclusion are broad enough to
eliminate coverage in this situation.
There is still another important provision of dram shop acts that
affects a person’s right of action. Some statutes hold a liquor vendor
accountable regardless of how much the sale may have contributed
to a person’s intoxication. In these states, it matters little how much
liquor is served to a person; the statutes permit rights of action
against any person who contributes to or causes the intoxication of a
person. Other statutes allow suits only when the vendor’s sale of
liquor causes a person’s intoxication.
Obviously, the laws involving those who contribute to the
intoxication of a person are much broader than those permitting
actions against those who cause the intoxication. Several liquor
businesses can become involved in a single incident if “contribution” is
the key word. For example, if a person consumes alcoholic
beverages in two or more liquor establishments during an evening,
the operators of all these businesses can be held responsible for
contributing to the consumer’s intoxication. It does not matter, in this
situation, what the consumer’s condition is during the time the liquor is
furnished or the amount of liquor consumed at each of these
locations; all persons or organizations furnishing liquor are implicated.The other kind of law holds only that vendor responsible who
serves the beverage that ultimately caused the intoxication. It does
not matter how many establishments are visited by the consumer—it
is the last location where the consumer is considered to have become
intoxicated that bears the liability. (It is still possible, however, for
several establishments to be involved, especially when the vendor
causing the intoxication is not clearly evident.)
Statutes Avoiding Liability
Some states, such as Colorado, have adopted a different view
from the dram shop acts previously discussed. California, in
legislative reaction to court cases holding liquor vendors liable for
injuries to third parties by intoxicated patrons, has embodied into
state law the common law principle that it is the consumption of
alcoholic beverages and not the selling or serving that is the
proximate cause of injuries, hence severely limiting alcoholic beverage
liability in that state. Persons who sell or furnish alcoholic beverages
to any habitual or common drunkard or to any obviously intoxicated
person are guilty of a misdemeanor. However, the law goes on to
state that no liquor vendor is civilly liable to any injured person or the
estate of such person for injuries inflicted on that person as a result
of intoxication by the consumer of such alcoholic beverage. (Cal. Bus.
& Prof. Code § 25602 and Cal. Penal Code § 397).
Alaska has taken basically the same stand. In that state, an
alcoholic beverages provider may only be liable to another person if
liquor is served to a person under the age of twenty-one or is
provided to a drunken person. (AS § 04.21.020).
As can be seen from the variations in states’ dram shop acts,
liquor liability exposures will differ, and insurance professionals must
make themselves aware of the regulations in their territories as these
relate to insureds and prospective insureds.Alcoholic Beverage Control Acts
Many states do not have dram shop acts. Instead they have
statutes, ordinances, or regulations dealing with alcoholic beverage
control. (In fact, all of the fifty states in the United States have
alcoholic beverage control acts regulating the sale of intoxicating
beverages.) These generally prohibit the sale or gift of liquor to a
minor, a habitual drunkard, or to an intoxicated person. Some are
even less specific. These states do not automatically give persons
injured by intoxicated patrons a civil right of action against the server
or seller that provided the alcoholic beverages. Instead, they provide
criminal penalties against the operator, and in some cases the owner,
of the premises where the sale or serving occurred.
In the absence of dram shop acts, liquor vendors still face
possible liability. However, most statutes, ordinances, and regulations
dealing with alcoholic beverage control are either limited in scope or
conditions, and sometimes both. Some jurisdictions classify sales of
alcohol to intoxicated persons, habitual drunkards, and minors as
criminal acts.
Owner of Premises—Responsibility
Owners and lessors of premises where liquor businesses are
conducted by others are also sometimes affected by dram shop acts
and alcoholic beverage control laws. This is important to insureds
because as the liquor liability exclusion appears in the 1973
comprehensive general liability policy, owners and lessors of
premises where alcoholic beverages are involved also fall subject to
the exclusion if liability arises out of the violation of any alcoholic
beverages statute or regulation. As previously mentioned, this part of
the exclusion was omitted from the 1986 and later versions of the
commercial general liability policy, thereby providing coverage for
owners or lessors who are not also operators of such premises.Basically, there are two reasons for holding an owner liable: (1)
the owner of a premises is, or should be, aware of the type of
business conducted thereon and should be just as responsible as the
operator of such business; and (2) the owner becomes another
recourse for the person who is unable to collect damages from the
operator of the business that caused or contributed to the intoxication
of a person.
Whether a property owner can be held severally liable or jointly
liable with the liquor business operator can only be answered by the
provisions of these acts. In any event, a suit against a property owner
or lessor is not usually permitted unless there is evidence of guilt on
the vendor’s part, too.
The problem of involving the owner or lessor of premises in such
lawsuits can sometimes be avoided. This is accomplished by
requiring the operator of the liquor business—l essee or tenant—to
assume all possible liability of the owner or lessor including that
stemming from violations of the dram shop act. But, unless there is a
statutory provision specifically dealing with owners or lessors of such
premises, the liability of such persons—at common law, for example
—is covered because the liquor liability exclusion in the 1973 CGL
policy eliminates only an owner’s or lessor’s coverage in the event
liability is assessed because of a violation of a liquor statute or
regulation. Under the 1986 and later CGL coverage form, insureds
that are owners and lessors of premises used for alcoholic
beverages operations—but who are not themselves involved in the
business—a re not subject to the exclusion.
Common Law Liability
It is common for courts to hold sellers of liquor liable under the
principles of common law negligence. Most of these cases at
common law are from states that do not have dram shop acts oralcoholic beverage control laws, but also of great importance are
those cases emanating from states that have had alcoholic
beverages control acts, or dram shop acts but repealed them. In this
latter situation, the consensus of the courts seems to be that the
repeal of dram shop acts does not abrogate common law negligence
principles.
This points to a shift in common law interpretation. For years, the
common law held that a person who was injured or whose property
was damaged by an intoxicated person had no cause of action
against the person who furnished the liquor. The reasoning behind this
rule is that the consumption of liquor is the proximate cause of
injuries or damages sustained and not the sale of liquor. In other
words, a person cannot become intoxicated when served liquor,
unless he consumes it. Injuries or damages caused by the actions of
an intoxicated person, therefore, stem from the person’s voluntary
consumption of alcoholic beverages—and not the sale.
Over the years, however, many courts have permitted suits
against liquor vendors—in the absence of dram shop acts—based
upon the principle of common law negligence: there is negligence
when a reasonably prudent person fails to recognize and foresee the
likelihood of harm or danger to others and behaves without the regard
that a reasonably prudent person would have for the harm or danger
that his or her behavior poses to others. Thus, when an operator of a
liquor business gives, sells, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person
who is visibly intoxicated or to a person he knows or should know
from the circumstances is a minor, the vendor should recognize and
foresee the possible harm that can be caused through the actions of
the intoxicated person or minor.
An early leading case on this point is Rappaport v. Nichols, 156
A.2d 1 (N.J. 1959) decided by the New Jersey Supreme Court. Since
New Jersey had no dram shop act at the time, the decedent’s estate
based its claim upon common law. In the case, an eighteen-year-oldboy, who had been drinking, was involved in a collision in which a man
was killed. The man’s estate sued the boy and four taverns charging
that the taverns had served the minor alcohol despite knowing that he
was underage. The sales of alcohol to the minor, therefore, were
illegal and the accident occurred because the minor had become
intoxicated due to this illegal conduct. The tavern owners argued that
assuming their conduct was unlawful and negligent, it was,
nevertheless, not the proximate cause of the injury suffered.
The court held, however, that if the tavern keepers unlawfully and
negligently sold alcoholic beverages to a minor, causing his
intoxication which in turn caused or contributed to his negligent
operation of a motor vehicle, a jury could have found that the
decedent’s death resulted from the tavern keepers’ negligence. Such
negligence, therefore, was possibly the substantial factor in bringing
the death about. Also, the minor’s negligent operation of a motor
vehicle was a risk the tavern keepers created or an event that they
could reasonably have foreseen. Hence, the proximate causal relation
between the seller’s unlawful, negligent conduct and the decedent’s
death was a question for the jury.
Note that this ruling was partially superseded by New Jersey’s
Licensed Alcoholic Beverage Server Fair Liability Act. The statute
provides that a server “shall be deemed to have been negligent only
when the server served a visibly intoxicated person, or served a
minor, under circumstances where the server knew, or reasonably
should have known, that the person was a minor” (N.J. Stat.
§2A:22A-5., 2000). The act also requires that the negligence
proximately causes the injury or damage.
Courts have imposed limited liability in this fashion to injuries that
could be reasonably foreseen by the liquor server. For example, the
cases discussed previously involved injuries caused by intoxicated
patrons driving automobiles shortly after being served alcohol by the
defendant. This is because it is reasonably foreseeable in the modernworld that patrons arrive at and depart from taverns in automobiles.
Courts also may or may not hold tavern keepers liable for assaults on
a patron by another intoxicated patron. In Herbert v. Club 37 Bar,
701 P.2d 847 (Ariz. App. 1984), the court refused to extend liability to
a tavern keeper for a murder committed by an intoxicated patron
shortly after drinking in the defendant’s bar.
Some courts have extended the common law negligence theory to
social hosts; see “Actions Against Social Hosts.”
Recovery by Intoxicated Persons
As mentioned previously, dram shop acts generally do not give an
intoxicated person a cause of action against a liquor vendor for
injuries he sustains because of his own acts. But, sometimes common
law permits a suit to be brought.
A case in point is Schelin v. Goldberg, 146 A.2d 648 (Pa. Super.
1958). This case arose in Pennsylvania seven years after this state
repealed its dram shop act. The injured person was the customer
himself—not an innocent third party. He entered a tavern in an
intoxicated condition and was served liquor. He was subsequently
injured in a fight with another person. The customer recovered a
judgment against the tavern keeper for these injuries—not because of
a dram shop law, but because the court held that the tavern operator
had breached a duty owed to the customer by selling him liquor when
he was intoxicated. In other words, the court held that the tavern
operator had a duty to protect a customer. One of the arguments on
behalf of the tavern operator was that recovery should not be
permitted because of the injured person’s contributory negligence.
The court ruled that recovery is not barred by the injured person’s
contributory negligence. (Note, however, that states have widely
differing positions on contributory and comparative negligence that
would affect the outcome of such a case in other jurisdictions.)Pennsylvania later enacted a comparative negligence statute. The
statute says that “the fact that the plaintiff may have been guilty of
contributory negligence shall not bar recovery by the plaintiff or his
legal representative where such negligence was not greater than the
causal negligence of the defendant or defendants against whom
recovery is sought, but any damages sustained by the plaintiff shall
be diminished in proportion to the amount of negligence attributed to
the plaintiff.” (42 Pa.C.S. §7102). The statute applies to actions for
recovery of damages for death or injury to persons or property as the
result of negligence.
The Louisiana Supreme Court issued a similar ruling in Pence v.
Ketchum, 326 So. 2d 831 (La. 1976). In the case, a patron of a bar
was struck by an automobile after being ordered to leave the bar at
closing time in an intoxicated condition. The court held that the owner
of the bar breached both the statutory duty as a retailer to refrain
from serving an intoxicated person (Louisiana has an alcoholic
beverages control act) and the duty that a business owes a patron to
avoid affirmative acts that increase the peril to intoxicated persons.
The bar owner, who was aware of the patron’s condition, failed to act
to avoid foreseeable harm.
Pence was subsequently overruled in part by Thrasher v. Leggett,
373 So. 2d 496 (La. 1979). This was a case where an intoxicated
person was served liquor, became overly aggressive, was removed
by a bouncer from the club, and was injured. The holding of Pence
was that a liquor retailer’s sale to an already intoxicated person in
violation of the state’s alcoholic beverage control law gave rise to an
action by the injured patron. Thrasher restricts this decision, holding
that there should be no absolute liability (under the state statute) on
the part of the vendor for an intoxicated patron’s injuries, but that
such an action can arise in the appropriate circumstances. In Pence,
the barkeeper’s affirmative action that gave rise to liability was
evicting the intoxicated patron at closing time; in Thrasher, theintoxicated patron’s own aggressive behavior was held to be the
cause of his injuries.
Courts may also be more apt to hold tavern keepers liable for
damages to the intoxicated person when the person is a minor. Such
was the outcome in New Mexico in Porter v. Ortiz, 665 P.2d 1149
(N.M. 1982).
Common Law Recovery Denied
As previously stated, the early general rule in states without
statutory schemes for assessing liability on liquor vendors was that
there can be no cause of action against a liquor vendor for an
unlawful sale that, in turn, causes the intoxication of a person. This
stance was based on the premise that consumption of liquor and not
the sale of liquor is the proximate cause of injuries that are
occasioned through intoxication.
Today this is the minority position. Only a few states adhere to
this viewpoint.
Liquor Exclusion—Who Is Affected?
The liquor liability exclusion in the CGL policy eliminates coverage
for insureds that are “in the businesses” of manufacturing, distributing,
selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages. The exclusion
eliminates coverage for bodily injury or property damage that any
insured may be held liable for due to causing or contributing to the
intoxication of any person; the furnishing of alcoholic beverages to a
person under the legal drinking age or under the influence of alcohol;
or the violation of any statute, regulation, or ordinance relating to the
sale, gift, distribution, or use of alcoholic beverages.The liquor liability exclusion in the 1986 CGL policy expressly
states that it applies only to those insureds involved in the alcoholic
beverages industry. The 1986 version of the exclusion differs from the
exclusion in the 1973 CGL form in this respect. Included in the scope
of the 1973 exclusion are owners or lessors of premises used for
alcoholic beverage operations if liability is imposed because of a
violation of a liquor statute or ordinance (this provision does not
appear in the 1986 version of the exclusion).
The exclusion applies principally to those engaged in the alcoholic
beverage business; manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers of
alcoholic beverages are examples. Also, owners or lessors of
premises where liquor business is conducted may also be affected by
the exclusion in the 1973 CGL policy. Whether owners or lessors
come within the scope of this exclusion depends upon whether they
can be held liable due to a violation of any statutory provision—such
as a dram shop act, regulation, or ordinance. This exclusion does not
apply to owners or lessors of premises for any action stemming from
common law negligence.
These general classes or persons, or organizations—businesses
selling or serving alcoholic beverages and, under the 1973 CGL
policy, owners or lessors of such premises—are without coverage
under liability policies when they violate any statute, ordinance, or
regulation. Since the exclusion refers to “any statute”, this policy
excludes violators in states that have dram shop acts, as well as
those having only alcoholic beverage control acts. Whether any
statute, ordinance, or regulation dealing with alcoholic beverages is
violated depends on the wording of that provision. Most dram shop
acts leave little room for argument, but alcoholic beverage control
acts usually are not as comprehensive—they apply to those who sell,
serve, or give liquor to minors, to habitual drunkards, and,
sometimes, to intoxicated persons.Even so, there are times when an alcoholic beverage control law
is not violated, but a cause of action in common law negligence is still
possible. Additionally, for those in the business of selling or serving
alcohol, when liability stems from the insured’s negligence in causing
or contributing to the intoxication of a person, the exclusion is broad
enough to bar coverage even in absence of a statute.
A case in point is Mitchell v. Ketner, 393 S.W.2d 755 (Tenn. App.
1964). This case involved an appeal by a tavern owner against a
favorable ruling for the estates of persons killed in a Sunday
automobile collision with an automobile driven by an intoxicated
person who was served by this tavern keeper. The only statutory
violation was the prohibited sale of intoxicants on Sunday. The court
held that there was insufficient evidence that the deaths were
proximately caused by the negligent sale of alcoholic beverages to
persons who could reasonably have been anticipated to inflict injuries
upon third persons. The court did hold, however, that there was a
cause of action in common law negligence. Apparently the liquor
liability exclusion could encompass cases of this type “by reason of
the furnishing of any alcoholic beverages … to a person under the
influence…” (Note that this decision was superseded in part by a
subsequent statute, Tennessee Code 57-10-102 [1989].)
Another case emphasizing the point that a cause of action in
common law negligence is still possible even though an alcoholic
beverage control act is not technically violated is Mason v. Roberts,
294 N.E.2d 884 (Ohio 1973). This case arose when a customer, who
was related to the tavern owner, allegedly caused the death of
another customer after being served liquor by an employee at the
tavern until he was intoxicated. The tavern owner argued that she did
not receive notice, actual or constructive, of an order from the state
liquor department prohibiting the sale or gift of intoxicating liquor to
that person. She also argued that the patron’s name did not appear
on any such list.Although both of the courts agreed that no action arose under the
liquor act unless the name of a habitual drunkard appeared on a list,
they also held that if such a requirement precluded a cause of action,
it would defeat the act’s stated purpose of promoting public safety.
The court, in holding for a cause of action in spite of the fact that the
intoxicated person’s name did not appear on a statutory list, stated
that the tavern owner should have known or, in exercising reasonable
care, should have realized that the person to whom liquor was sold
would become violent upon becoming intoxicated.
This case emphasizes the point that, while the need for liquor
liability insurance is of less concern in a state that has a limited liquor
liability law or in which the courts have upheld the common law
interpretation of no liability on seller or server, there is still a degree
of uncertainty as to how a court may rule in a future case.
(Note here that an Ohio appeals court ruled in Brown v. Hyatt-
Allen American Legion Post No. 538, 1990 WL 174317 (Ohio App.
1990) that the Mason case is no longer controlling due to the
enactment of a statute limiting the liability for acts of intoxicated
persons.) (Ohio Rev. Code §4399.18.)
There are a few states, as previously mentioned, that do not have
either dram shop acts or other statutes or have not held a vendor
liable under common law. A common question involving such states
concerns the effect that the liquor liability exclusion has on a liquor
vendor. Until the legislators of such states enact dram shop acts or
other statutes, or the courts of such states sustain actions at
common law, it appears that this exclusion is of little concern. On the
other hand, there are some states that do have limited liquor liability
statutes but continue to follow the common law interpretation of
nonliability.There is no way of determining when a court might decide to
sustain a case in common law negligence in one of these states. If
and when it does, the expenses of defense and the judgment award
pose a potentially severe burden to anyone engaged in the liquor
business.
1989 Liquor Exclusion Endorsements
A common problem of interpreting the current CGL liquor liability
exclusion is deciding what is, and what is not, being “in the business
of manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic
beverages,” because the exclusion applies only to insureds so
engaged “in the business”. (See “Other Coverage Aspects,” below,
for a review of this issue.)
In order to remove the uncertainty connected with this phrasing,
Insurance Services Office (ISO) developed two optional
endorsements, CG 21 50 and CG 21 51. These endorsements are
optional at the insurer’s discretion.
CG 21 50 is titled “Amendment of Liquor Liability Exclusion.”
There is no change in the acts that trigger the exclusion. Coverage is
denied if the insured causes or contributes to the intoxication of any
person, furnishes liquor to a minor or a person under the influence of
alcohol, or if liability is assessed through a statutory scheme.
The major revision in the amendment relates to whom the
exclusion applies. ISO has written the endorsement to clarify that one
does not have to engage in a licensed activity or be operating with a
profit motive to fall under the exclusion. The often litigated phrase “in
the business of” is eliminated. Instead, the exclusion applies only if
the insured (1) manufactures, sells, or distributes alcoholic
beverages, (2) serves liquor for a charge, regardless of whether or
not the activity requires a license or is for the purpose of financialgain, or (3) serves liquor without charge if a license is required for
such an activity.
It is possible that the word “distribute” as used in the amended
exclusion could cause confusion regarding coverage. For example,
can an insured be said to be “distributing” liquor for purposes of
triggering the exclusion if beer is served at a company picnic? The
phrase must be looked at in the context of surrounding language. As
“distribute” is used in context with “sell” and “manufacture,” a
commercial connotation is apparently contemplated, and the insured-
employer serving drinks at a company social function—without charge
—would not be affected by the exclusion. This is further bolstered by
the apparent distinction the drafters of the endorsement made
between the words “distribute” in one section of the exclusion and
“serve” in another. However, if the employer makes a charge for the
alcohol, or sponsors a company social function with a cash bar, the
exclusion could be used to avoid coverage.
Endorsement CG 21 51 is identical to CG 21 50, with the
exception that this version provides for excepting scheduled activities
from the scope of the exclusion. To be covered, specific activities that
would normally fall under the exclusion may be listed in the
endorsement or the policy declarations as exempt from the liquor
exclusion.
Liability Arising from Business Entertaining
The question is often raised regarding whether a person,
institution, or business insured under a CGL form needs special
insurance against liability arising out of business entertaining. The
issue is important because courts are now more likely than in the past
to impose liability on liquor providers, even hosts at purely social
events, under negligence principles.Insureds, therefore, should be made aware of the liability
exposure that can be present where the insured provides alcoholic
beverages in a business-social setting, such as a company Christmas
party, summer picnic, or other gathering. The facts that could lead to
an employer’s liability are similar to the situation of the liquor retailer:
the employer provides liquor to an intoxicated client or employee, the
employee proceeds to drive away from the company outing
subsequently injuring a third party, and the employer is then found
liable for the injuries under principles of common law negligence.
Where alcoholic beverages are provided without a charge of any
kind, there is no exclusion in the CGL policy that would eliminate
coverage in this situation. Entertaining customers with alcoholic drinks
or providing beer at a company picnic is not equivalent to being
engaged in the business of selling or serving alcoholic beverages.
However, the issue is not so clear where the business or
institution, such as a university or volunteer fire department, sells
alcoholic beverages at special events or even charges admission to
events at which alcoholic beverages are available. For coverage
purposes under the current CGL form, are these insureds then, albeit
limitedly, “in the business of manufacturing, distributing, serving or
selling alcoholic beverages”?
The answer is clearer in the 1989 amendatory endorsements.
Liability arising out of incidents where the insured serves liquor for a
charge is excluded, but is not excluded where no charge is made, or
if no license is required for the activity.
As to the assessment of liability in these situations, courts have
generally limited the applicability of dram shop acts and similar
statutes to those active in the liquor business and usually have
allowed social hosts the common law defense of consumption, notserving, as proximate cause. However, there is some movement in
the other direction (see the New Jersey decision in Linn, below.)
In Miller v. Owens-Illinois Glass Co., 199 N.E.2d 300 (Ill. App.
1964), an employee who was apparently intoxicated from beverages
served at a company-sponsored picnic was involved in an automobile
accident resulting in injuries to other persons. In the suit against the
employer and an employee association, the injured persons sought
damages under the Illinois dram shop act, arguing that the serving of
liquor under the circumstances made them liable. However, the court
held that the company was not engaged in the liquor business, and
therefore was not subject to provisions of the state’s dram shop laws.
An appellate court affirmed the decision, holding that the dram
shop act applied only to those actually in the liquor business; the law
was not intended to include social drinking of intoxicating beverages.
This reasoning was later upheld in another Illinois appellate court
case, Camille v. Berry Fertilizers, Inc., 334 N.E.2d 205 (Ill. App.
1975).
Note, though, that while the employer may not be subject to
provisions of the state’s dram shop laws, the state’s dram shop laws
do not preempt claims independent from the employer’s providing of
alcohol, such as vicarious liability under the theory of respondeat
superior. See Hicks v. Korean Airlines Co., 936 N.E.2d 1144
(Ill.App.).
In D’Amico v. Christie, 518 N.E. 2d 896 (N.Y. 1987), the New
York Court of Appeals held that New York’s dram shop act applied
only to commercial sales of alcohol. In this case, the Court of
Appeals refused to impose liability on an employees’ voluntary society
for providing alcohol at a company picnic to an employee who
consumed the alcohol before driving drunk and colliding with another
driver. A New Jersey appeals court found a business liable fordamages sustained after an employee became intoxicated at an
office party and caused a fatality in a subsequent auto accident. In
Davis v. Sam Goody Inc., 480 A.2d 212 (N.J. Super. 1984) the court
decided, “it is abundantly clear to us that liability in this State depends
not on the nature or character of the supplier of the alcoholic
beverage nor on whether the tortfeasor is a minor or an adult. Rather,
liability depends upon the conventional negligence analysis respecting
foreseeability.
In Congini v. Portersville Valve Co., 470 A.2d 515 (Pa. 1983),
Pennsylvania recognized a common law cause of action based on
negligence against a company that had hosted a Christmas party for
injuries sustained by a minor employee who became intoxicated at
the party and subsequently drove his car into the rear of another
vehicle. The decision is also noteworthy in that the court allowed
recovery by the minor for his own injuries and not solely for the
injuries sustained by a third party.
“In the Business” under the CGL Policy
Under the exclusion as it appears in the 1973 CGL form, the basic
1986 CGL policy without the optional exclusionary endorsements, or
in the current CGL policy, in cases where alcoholic beverages are
only tangentially related to the insured’s business—su ch as a
company picnic where a cash bar is provided, or at a political fund
raiser where profits from alcoholic beverages are involved—insurance
coverage will turn on the definition applied to the term “in the business
of.” Because the term “business” is not defined in the policy, disputes
have arisen as to what constitutes being “in the business of
manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving or furnishing” alcoholic
beverages.
The relevant language was revised slightly in the 1986 CGL liquor
liability exclusion. The 1973 exclusion affected persons ororganizations “engaged in the business of manufacturing, distributing,
selling, or serving alcoholic beverages.” The simplified language of
the 1986 liquor liability exclusion applies “if you are in the business of
manufacturing, distributing, selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic
beverages.” The exclusion in the current version of the CGL form
uses the same language.
In the case of Heritage Insurance Company of America v. Cilano,
433 So.2d 1334 (Fla. App. 1983), the insured argued that because
his license restricted liquor sales to 49 percent of the restaurant’s
total revenue, alcoholic beverages were incidental only to the overall
operation, and that the policy was ambiguous on this point. The court
ruled in favor of the insurance company. It ruled that coverage is
extended to functions that are incidental to the insured’s business
unless that business is the manufacturing, selling, distributing, or
serving of alcoholic beverages. Since the insured admitted to being in
the business of liquor sales, he was not covered. Further, the court
held that were it to accept that some portions of the liquor provision
are ambiguous, such ambiguity would be irrelevant because all
functions of an insured who distributes, sells, or serves alcoholic
beverages are excluded, not merely those incidental to his business.
The liquor liability exclusion—as it appears in the 1973 CGL policy
—was held to be ambiguous in Laconia Rod and Gun Club v.
Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co., 459 A.2d 249 (N.H. 1983), and
the case was decided against the insurer. In this case, a patron
alleged the club had breached its common law duty by serving her
alcoholic beverages until she became intoxicated and allowing her to
leave the premises without knowing whether she was properly
escorted. As a result, she fell and was injured. The club requested
the insurer to provide a defense in the action, but the insurance
company denied liability, relying on the liquor exclusion. The insured
sued arguing the exclusion is inapplicable because the club is not “in
the business of” selling or serving liquor as used in the exclusion, as it
did not make a profit as would a tavern. In its decision, the courtstated, “[T]he meaning of the phrase ‘in the business of’ … is
ambiguous … It can be used in a broad sense to mean any regular
activity that occupies one’s time and attention, with or without a direct
profit objective, or it can be used more narrowly to mean an activity
with a direct profit objective. Because the phrase ‘in the business of’
as used in this policy is ambiguous, we must interpret it in favor of the
club and hold that the club is not in the business of selling or serving
alcoholic beverages.” Id. 459 A.2d at 251 (citing 12A C.J.S. Business
464-65 (1980)).
As a result of Laconia, ISO issued a New Hampshire amendatory
endorsement—GL 01 55—that changed the liquor liability exclusion to
exclude the “selling or serving of alcoholic beverages for a charge
regardless of whether the insured … is in the business of making a
profit from the selling or serving of such beverages.” Note that this
exclusion was offered specifically to clarify the intent of the policy
drafters not to cover losses such as those sustained in Laconia, and
closely resembles the wording of the 1989 exclusionary liquor
endorsement. The exclusion applies if the insured furnishes liquor for
a charge whether or not such activity requires a license or is done for
the purpose of financial gain. Note also that, today, this exclusion is
no longer in use.
In Sprangers v. Greatway Ins. Co., 514 N.W.2d 1 (Wisc. 1994), a
nonprofit organization argued that the term “in the business” was
ambiguous, and therefore could not be relied upon to deny coverage.
The court stated, “the nature and purpose of the policy as a whole
bears on the expectations of the insured. The terms of VFW’s
insurance policy demonstrate that the non-profit nature of the insured
is irrelevant for the purposes of the policy. The coverage is tied to the
activities of the insured, not to its for-profit or non-profit nature.” The
Wisconsin Supreme Court, in holding that the liquor liability exclusion
was enforceable, went on to explain how a reasonable person would
have understood that the VFW was in the business of selling and
serving alcoholic beverages.However in another case, a Minnesota appeals court concluded
that a nonprofit organization was not in the business of selling,
serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages by selling beer at an annual,
one-day fundraising event in Mutual Service Casualty Ins. Co. v.
Wilson Township, 603 N.W.2d 151 (Minn. App. 1999). In this case,
Wilson Township and the volunteer Wilson Fire Department
sponsored an annual town festival to raise funds for the fire
department. A man who was served beer at the event struck a car,
injuring its occupants. The injured parties sued Wilson Township,
which tendered a claim to its insurer, Mutual Service Casualty. Mutual
denied the claim, invoking the liquor liability exclusion. The court
pointed out that Wilson Township sold beer for fundraising purposes
only, that the sale was temporary, and that the Township did not
enjoy substantial profits from the sale of beer. The court stated,
“given these facts, we conclude the insured was not in the business
of selling, serving, or furnishing alcoholic beverages for the purposes
of the liquor liability exclusion.”
Actions against Social Hosts
Traditionally courts have been reluctant to recognize a right of
action against social hosts, relying on social settings in the older
common law principle that it is the consumption and not the serving of
alcoholic beverages that is the proximate cause of liquor-related
incidents. However, social concern with the problem of intoxicated
drivers has caused a few jurisdictions to re-evaluate their positions.
An example of a case where the court refused to recognize a right
of action against social hosts is Westcoat v. Mielke, 310 N.W.2d 293
(Mich. App. 1981). In this case, a Michigan appellate court declined
recovery in an action against a social host for providing alcoholic
beverages and then ejecting the guest. The guest alleged that he was
injured in a single-car accident after becoming visibly intoxicated at
the home of the host, and that the host forced him to leave by
automobile. The court held that recovery was exclusively statutoryand that liability under the dram shop act was limited to liquor
retailers; in other words, the guest’s legal action was neither
permitted by statute nor recognized at common law.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court considered the issue and
refused to extend liability to the social hosts that served alcoholic
beverages to an intoxicated adult guest prior to his involvement in an
automobile accident. The common law cause of action was based on
the alleged negligence on the part of the hosts in not foreseeing that
the visibly intoxicated guest would drive. The court in Klein v.
Raysinger, 470 A.2d 507 (Pa. 1983), reviewed cases from several
jurisdictions. While it acknowledged that a few states had found
social hosts liable for injuries caused by intoxicated guests, “the great
weight of authority supports the view that in the case of an ordinary
able-bodied man, it is the consumption of the alcohol, rather than the
furnishing of the alcohol, which is the proximate cause of any
subsequent occurrence.”
In addition, the Klein court pointed out that several jurisdictions,
including California (a state where the high court had found a social
host liable) and Minnesota, had legislatively resolved the question by
enacting statutes preventing liability to be passed to social hosts
(except, as will be noted, in the case of social hosts serving liquor to
minors).
New Jersey found a cause of action against social hosts for
damage caused by intoxicated adult guests. In Kelly v. Gwinnell, 476
A.2d 1219 (N.J. 1984), the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that a
social host who provides intoxicating liquor to a guest knowing that
guest is intoxicated, and knowing that the guest will soon drive, is
liable for injuries inflicted on a third party as a result of the guest’s
negligent operation of a motor vehicle.The court noted that New Jersey had no dram shop act at that
time imposing specific liability, “and that while [its]decisional law had
imposed such liability on licensees, common-law liability had been
extended to a social host only where the guest was a minor.”
Nevertheless, the court held that the test for a cause of action under
common law negligence had been met, stating that the, “defendant
provided his guest with liquor, knowing that thereafter the guest would
have to drive in order to get home. One could reasonably conclude
that [the social hosts] must have known that their provision of liquor
was causing Gwinnell to become drunk, yet they continued to serve
him after he was visibly intoxicated. A reasonable person could
foresee quite clearly this continued providing of alcohol to Gwinnell
was making it more and more likely that Gwinnell would not be able
to operate his car carefully. [The social host] could foresee that
unless he stopped providing drinks to Gwinnell, Gwinnell was likely to
injure someone as a result of the negligent operation of his car. The
usual elements of a cause of action for negligence are clearly
present.”
Note that, while this decision firmly established social host liability
in New Jersey, the state legislature later modified it by state law.
N.J.S.A. 2A: 15-5.7 limited the potential liability of a social host for
the host’s negligent provision of alcoholic beverages to a person who
has not attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
Social hosts have also been held potentially liable for alcohol-
related incidents in Indiana.
In Ashlock v. Norris, 475 N.E.2d 1167 (Ind. App. 1985), an
Indiana court of appeals interpreted a state alcoholic beverage
control statute to allow a cause of action against a man who had
purchased drinks for a woman in a tavern, allegedly causing her
intoxication, who subsequently ran over and killed a jogger. The law
provides, “It is unlawful for a person to sell, barter, deliver or giveaway an alcoholic beverage to another person who is in a state of
intoxication if the person knows that the other person is intoxicated.”
IC 7.1-5-10-15. While recognizing that the great majority of cases
tried under this statute were against commercial liquor vendors, the
court stated that the legislature had chosen to draw no distinction
between one who sells in violation or one who gives away liquor in
violation of the statute.
However, illustrating that the law is not settled in this area,
another Indiana district court of appeals considered the same
question and found against holding the social host liable in Campbell
v. Bd. of Trustees of Wabash College, 495 N.E.2d 227 (Ind. App.
1986).
Statutes Affecting Social Hosts
Some states have statutorily moved to establish a position
regarding the liability of social hosts. These statutes are not uniform,
and arrive at liability by different means, or are used to establish a
position of no liability (based on the common law principle that the
consumption and not the serving of alcoholic beverages is the
proximate cause of injuries in alcohol-related incidents). The statutes
of Colorado, New York, Illinois, and California are representative of
these types of laws.
In New York, the statute provides that anyone injured in person,
property, means of support, or otherwise, by reason of the
intoxication of a person under the age of twenty-one, has a cause of
action against any person unlawfully furnishing to or assisting in
procuring alcoholic beverages with knowledge or reasonable cause to
believe that such person was under twenty-one years old (N.Y.
General Obligation Law. §11-100). This statute creates the same
liability for social hosts that establishments governed by dram shop oralcoholic beverage acts have in regard to the furnishing of alcohol to
minors.
The social host legislation of Illinois is only slightly less sweeping.
This law provides that any person shall be guilty of a class A
misdemeanor if: 1) he or she knowingly permits a gathering at a
residence which he or she occupies where any one or more persons
is under twenty-one years of age and these persons possess or
consume alcoholic beverages; and 2) the person occupying the
residence knows that a person under twenty-one leaves the
residence in an intoxicated condition (235 ILCS 5/6-16). Since this
statute creates a misdemeanor criminal offense for providing
alcoholic beverages to a minor, but does not specifically create a civil
cause of action, the civil liability of the social host is not clear. Future
case law in this area will resolve this uncertainty.
California and Colorado have also statutorily addressed the
liability of social hosts, and arrived at the opposite conclusion. As
discussed earlier, these laws embody the common law approach.
The California statute states, “No social host who furnishes alcoholic
beverages to any person may be held legally accountable for
damages suffered by that person, or for injury to the person or
property of, or death of, any third person, resulting from the
consumption of those beverages.” (Cal. Civ. Code. §1714.) The
California legislature has amended §1714 allowing for liability to
attach when a social host knowingly furnishes alcoholic beverages at
his or her residence to a person under twenty-one years of age.
Colorado’s law exempts social hosts from liability unless the social
host knowingly and willfully serves liquor to a person under twenty-
one. The statute also caps damages at $280,810 (Colo. Rev. Stat.
§12-47-801). In 1991, a plaintiff argued that Colorado’s law was
unconstitutional as unreasonably vague and violative of due process
and the equal protection rights of the heirs of intoxicated persons.
The court upheld the statute, stating that it was reasonably related tothe state’s legitimate purpose of preventing negligence by consumers
of alcohol. See Sigman v. Seafood Partnership, 817 P.2d 527 (Colo.
1991).
As mentioned by the Pennsylvania court in the previously
discussed Klein case, Minnesota has also adopted this position.
Social Hosts and Minors
More often a civil cause of action has been found against social
hosts who provide alcoholic beverages to minors. One of the leading
cases is Linn v. Rand, 356 A.2d 15 (N.J. Super. 1976), in which a
New Jersey appellate court held that a person who furnishes
excessive amounts of liquor to a minor on a social occasion may be
held liable when the intoxicated minor causes injury to an innocent
third party. The injured person must prove the following: that the
driver was a minor; that the social host was aware of the driver’s
age; that the minor intended to drive but nevertheless was served
alcohol, which resulted in the minor being unfit to drive; that an
accident involving bodily injury was reasonably foreseeable; and that
the host’s negligence was the proximate cause of the accident or
injuries.
In Longstreth v. Fitzgibbon, 335 N.W.2d 677 (Mich. App. 1983), a
Michigan appellate court permitted a cause of action against the
hosts of a wedding reception, differentiating between the liability
involved in furnishing liquor to adults and minors. The court stated,
“suit in the instant case is not predicated upon the defendants’
furnishing alcoholic beverages to a strong and able-bodied man.
Rather, plaintiffs’ cause of action stems from the defendants’ actions
of allegedly furnishing intoxicants to minors. Therefore, the principle
which would have barred plaintiffs’ suit had the alcohol been furnished
to strong and able-bodied men is not in point.”Host Liquor Liability Insurance
As to liability insurance applying to damages in Linn, and other
such social host cases, whether liability arises under statute or not,
there is no liquor liability exclusion in comprehensive personal liability
coverage. However, insurers might successfully argue that the effect
of the expected or intended injury exclusion contained in personal
liability policies is to eliminate coverage for bodily injury or property
damage that is reasonably foreseeable from the standpoint of the
insured. A court could relieve an insurer of obligations to an insured
through this channel. A court may hold that damage or injury
stemming from a host’s serving liquor to a guest to the point of
intoxication should be expected even if not intended. Social host liquor
liability insurance, available through specialty markets, might be
considered for coverage at least of defense costs.
Similarly, businesses in no way connected to the alcoholic
beverages industry, but that do occasionally provide liquor for clients
or employee functions, may find themselves in the same gray area.
All general liability policies contain the liquor liability exclusion. Again,
there would appear to be coverage for damage or injury arising from
the intoxication of guests or employees by virtue of the fact that such
concerns are not engaged in the alcoholic beverages businesses.
However, the same provision related to “expected or intended” injury
or damage may be held to apply, thereby negating the general liability
insurance coverage. Social host liquor liability insurance should be
considered for commercial insureds that have social entertaining
activities.
Liquor Liability Classification Grades
The Insurance Services Office (ISO) has established liquor liability
grades reflecting a particular state’s attitude toward liability for the
liquor vendor; the grades range from 0 to 10. The ISO commerciallines manual (CLM) states that a state designated with a 0 is one in
which there is no cause of action against one who supplies, furnishes,
vends, or sells liquor due to bodily injury (including death) or property
damage that is caused by an intoxicated person. The following chart
shows that there are several states in this classification.
A state designated with a number from 1 to 9 imposes moderate
liability for the liquor vendor, that is, a cause of action may be brought
against a vendor under certain circumstances. The CLM offers
several examples of this classification, such as if the liquor vendor
supplies liquor to a minor; supplies liquor to one whom the vendor
knows or should know is intoxicated; supplies liquor to one that the
vendor has been advised is a known alcohol abuser; or if the vendor
is in violation of the state liquor control laws.
The CLM lists a state as a 10 if it imposes strict liability on the
liquor vendor. In this instance, the mere act of furnishing the liquor is
deemed to be the proximate cause of injury or damage. Based on the
grade chart published by ISO, only Alabama and Vermont are in this
classification.
The following is the ISO liquor liability grade chart for all the
states, D.C., and U.S. territories.
Current ISO Liquor Liability Grades
STATE GRADE
ALABAMA 10
ALASKA 8
ARIZONA 5
ARKANSAS 3CALIFORNIA 3
COLORADO 3
CONNECTICUT 5
DELAWARE 0
DIST. OF COLUMBIA 9
FLORIDA 3
GEORGIA 4
GUAM —
HAWAII 7
IDAHO 4
ILLINOIS 3
INDIANA 5
IOWA 0*/7**
KANSAS 0
KENTUCKY 3
LOUISIANA 3
MAINE 4
MARYLAND 0
MASSACHUSETTS 6
MICHIGAN 5MINNESOTA 4
MISSISSIPPI 4
MISSOURI 0*/4**
MONTANA 5
NEBRASKA 3
NEVADA 0
NEW HAMPSHIRE 7
NEW JERSEY 4
NEW MEXICO 5
NEW YORK 6
NORTH CAROLINA 6
NORTH DAKOTA 5
OHIO 4
OKLAHOMA 3*/5**
OREGON 4
PENNSYLVANIA 7
PUERTO RICO 0
RHODE ISLAND 6
SOUTH CAROLINA 6
SOUTH DAKOTA 0TENNESSEE 3
TEXAS 6
UTAH 0*/6
VERMONT 10
VIRGIN ISLANDS —
VIRGINIA 0
WASHINGTON 5
WEST VIRGINIA 7
WISCONSIN 2
WYOMING 5
* for off-premises consumption
** for on-premises consumption
Premises Liability
Status of the Classification System
Premises liability is a legal concept that generally comes into play
in personal injury cases where the injury is caused by an unsafe or
defective condition on the insureds property. In general a property
owner must use reasonable care in connection with their property,
and a failure to do so may lead to a premises liability claim against
the property owner. Following is a brief explanation of the traditional
classification system.One important factor in determining the premises liability of a
landowner to those who are injured on his property is knowing the
landowner’s duty and his relationship to the injured party. Under the
traditional classification system, the injured party would fall into one of
three categories: invitee, licensee, or trespasser. An invitee is
someone who has the landowners express or implied permission to
enter onto the property. Traditionally the landowner owed an invitee a
duty of reasonable care to keep the property reasonably safe. A
licensee is someone who has the landowners express or implied
permission to enter the property, but who is entering the property for
his own benefit, such as a salesman. Traditionally, the landowner
owed the licensee a lesser duty than that owed to an invitee, a mere
duty to warn of a dangerous condition that created an unreasonable
risk of harm if the landowner knew about the condition and the
licensee was not likely to discover the condition. A trespasser is
someone who does not have the necessary permission or authority to
be on a specific piece of property. Traditionally a landowner owed no
duty to a trespasser unless that trespasser was a child, in which case
the landowner owed a duty to exercise reasonable care to avoid a
reasonably foreseeable risk of harm to a child cause d by an artificial
condition on the land. Examples of artificial conditions include
swimming pools and trampolines.
The rules regarding the traditional classification vary greatly by
state. The following list is a brief state-by-state overview of the status
of the traditional classification system.
Alabama: Retains traditional classification system. McMullan v.
Butler, 346 So.2d 950 (Ala. 1977).
Alaska: Abolished traditional classification system. Webb v. City and
Borough of Sitka, 561 P.2d 731 (Alaska 1977). Alaska Stat. Ann.
§09.65.200. (Supersedes case law in part, but does not change the
status of Alaska’s classification system.).Arizona: Retains traditional classification system. Nicoletti v.
Westcor, Inc., 639 P.2d 330 (Ariz. 1982).
Arkansas: Retains traditional classification system. Baldwin v.
Mosley, 748 S.W.2d 146 (Ark. 1988).
California: Abolished traditional classification system. Rowland v.
Christian, 70 Cal. Rptr. 97 (1968). Cal. Civ. Code §847 states “A
property owner is not liable to any person for injury or death that
occurs upon that property during the course of or after the
commission of any felonies by the injured or deceased person.”
Colorado: Retains a form of traditional classification system. Colo.
Rev. Stat. §13-21-115.
Connecticut: Retains traditional classification system. Morin v. Bell
Court Condo Ass’n, 612 A.2d 1197 (Conn. 1992). C.G.S.A. § 52-
557a.
Delaware: Retains traditional classification system. Bailey v.
Pennington, 406 A.2d 44 (Del. 1979). Del. Code Ann. tit. 25, §1501.
(No person who enters onto premises owned by another person,
either as guest without payment or a trespasser, shall have a cause
of action against the owner for any injuries sustained while on the
premises unless the accident was intentional by the owner or caused
by willful or wanton disregard of the rights of others.)
District of Columbia: Abolished traditional classification system.
Smith v. Arbaugh’s Restaurant, Inc., 469 F.2d 97 (D.C. Cir. 1972).
Florida: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Wood v. Camp, 284
So.2d 691 (Fla. 1973).Georgia: Retains traditional classification system. Epps v.
Chattahoochee Brick Co., 231 S.E.2d 443 (Ga. 1976). Ga. Code
Ann., § 51-3-1.
Hawaii: Abolished traditional classification system. Pickard v. City
and County of Honolulu, 452 P.2d 445 (Haw. 1969). HRS § 521-45.
Idaho: Retains traditional classification system. Mooney v. Robinson,
471 P.2d 63 (Idaho 1970).
Illinois: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. 740 ILCS §§130/2,
130/3.
Indiana: Retains traditional classification system. Burrell v. Meads,
569 N.E.2d 637 (Ind. 1991). IC 14-22-10-2.
Iowa: Retains traditional classification system. Champlin v. Walker,
249 N.W.2d 839 (Iowa 1977).
Kansas: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Jones v. Hansen,
867 P.2d 303 (Kan. 1994).
Kentucky: Retains traditional classification system. Kirschner v.
Louisville Gas & Elec. Co., 743 S.W.2d 840 (Ky. 1988).
Louisiana: Abolished traditional classification system. Cates v.
Beauregard Elec. Coop., Inc., 328 So.2d 367 (La. 1976). LSA-C.C.
Art. 660.
Maine: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Poulin v. Colby
College, 402 A.2d 846 (Me. 1979).Maryland: Retains traditional classification system. Sherman v.
Suburban Trust Co., 384 A.2d 76 (Md. 1978).
Massachusetts: Abolished traditional classification system for
invitees and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers.
Mounsey v. Ellard, 297 N.E.2d 43 (Mass. 1973).
Michigan: Retains traditional classification system. Doran v. Combs,
354 N.W.2d 804 (Mich. Ct. App. 1984).
Minnesota: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Peterson v.
Balach, 199 N.W.2d 639 (Minn. 1972).
Mississippi: Retains traditional classification system. Astleford v.
Milner Enterprises, Inc., 233 So.2d 524 (Miss. 1970).
Missouri: Retains traditional classification system. Carter v. Kinney,
896 S.W.2d 926 (Mo. 1995).
Montana: Abolished traditional classification system. Limberhand v.
Big Ditch Co., 706 P.2d 491 (Mont. 1985).
Nebraska: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Heins v. Webster
County, 552 N.W.2d 51 (Neb. 1996).
Nevada: Abolished traditional classification system. Moody v.
Manny’s Auto Repair, 871 P.2d 935 (Nev. 1994).
New Hampshire: Abolished traditional classification system.
Ouellette v. Blanchard, 364 A.2d 631 (N.H. 1976).New Jersey: Retains traditional classification system. LSA-C.C. Art.
660 Hopkins v. Fox & Lazo Realtors, 599 A.2d 924 (N.J. Super. App.
Div. 1991). N.J.S.A. 2A:42A-4.
New Mexico: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Ford v. Board of
County Comm’rs, 879 P.2d 766 (N.M. 1994).
New York: Abolished traditional classification system. Basso v.
Miller, 386 N.Y.S.2d 564 (1976). McKinney’s General Obligations
Law § 9-103.
North Carolina: Abolished traditional classification system. Nelson v.
Freeland, 507 S.E.2d 882 (N.C. 1998).
North Dakota: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. O’Leary v.
Coenen, 251 N.W.2d 746 (N.D. 1977).
Ohio: Retains traditional classification system. DiGildo v. Caponi,
247 N.E.2d 732 (Ohio 1969).
Oklahoma: Retains traditional classification system. Sutherland v.
Saint Francis Hosp., Inc., 595 P.2d 780 (Okla. 1979). 76 Okl. St.
Ann. § 80.
Oregon: Retains traditional classification system. Thompson v.
Klimp, 789 P.2d 696 (Or. App. 1990). O.R.S. § 105.682.
Pennsylvania: Retains traditional classification system. Carrender v.
Fitterer, 469 A.2d 120 (Pa. 1983).
Rhode Island: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Tantimonico v.Allendale Mut. Ins. Co., 637 A.2d 1056 (R.I. 1994).
South Carolina: Retains traditional classification system. Hoover v.
Broome, 479 S.E.2d 62 (S.C. Ct. App. 1996).
South Dakota: Retains traditional classification system. Underberg
v. Cain, 348 N.W.2d 145 (S.D 1984).
Tennessee: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Hudson v.
Gaitan, 675 S.W.2d 699 (Tenn. 1984). V.T.C.A., Civil Practice &
Remedies Code § 75.002.
Texas: Retains traditional classification system. Buchholz v. Steitz,
463 S.W.2d 451 (Tex. App. 1971).
Utah: Retains traditional classification system. Tjas v. Proctor, 591
P.2d 438 (Utah 1979).
Vermont: Retains traditional classification system to some extent.
Cameron v. Abatiell, 241 A.2d 310 (Vt. 1968). Reasonable care
required “under all circumstances.” Demag v. Better Power Equip.,
Inc., 2014 VT 78, 102 A.3d 1101 (Vt. 2014).
Virginia: Retains traditional classification system. Tate v. Rice, 315
S.E.2d 385 (Va. 1984).
Washington: Retains traditional classification system. Younce v.
Ferguson, 724 P.2d 991 (Wash. 1986).
West Virginia: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Mallet v.
Pickens, 522 S.E.2d 436 (W. Va. 1999).Wisconsin: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees
and licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Antoniewicz v.
Reszcyn ski, 236 N.W.2d 1 (Wis. 1975).
Wyoming: Abolished traditional classification system for invitees and
licensees but retains distinction for trespassers. Clarke v. Beckwith,
858 P.2d 293 (Wyo. 1993).
Dram Shop Laws
State-by-State Analysis
Dram Shop laws are statutory provisions that allow
establishments that are licensed to sell alcohol to be held liable for
serving alcohol to individuals who cause bodily injury or death as a
result of their intoxication. While serving alcohol to minors is illegal in
all 50 states, many states impose liability on bars for serving minors
who subsequently injure themselves or a third party, in hopes to deter
bars from serving alcoholic beverages to minors.
This analysis is not provided as a legal reference, instead it should
be used for general information purposes.
Alabama
Ala. Code 1975 § 6-5-71
Civil and Criminal Liability
Alabama statute allows for anyone who suffers bodily injury, property
damage, or loss of support caused by an intoxicated person has a
legal right of action against a person who sold, gave, or disposed of
any alcoholic beverages and in effect caused the intoxication of theperson who caused the damage for all damages actually sustained,
as well as exemplary damages. The injured party may also file suit
against the person who was intoxicated and caused the loss.
Alaska
AS §§ 04.21.020, 04.16.030
Civil and Criminal Liability
A person who provided alcoholic beverages to another may not be
held civilly liable for injuries resulting from their intoxication unless the
person holds a license to sell alcohol, or works as an agent of an
entity that has a license to sell alcohol, and provides alcoholic
beverages to a person who is already considered legally drunk or to
a person under the legal drinking age unless the licensee secures in
good faith from the patron a signed statement, or drivers’ license that
indicates that the person is over the legal drinking age.
Arizona
A.R.S. §§ 4-301, 4-311, 4-312
Civil Liability
A social host not carrying a license is not liable for bodily injury,
death, or property damage caused by reason of the supply or serving
of alcohol to a person of the legal drinking age. A license holder may
be found liable for damages if they (1) sold alcohol to someone who
was obviously intoxicated, or under the legal drinking age without
requesting proof of age verification, (2) if the purchaser consumed
the alcohol and (3) the consumption was a proximate cause of the
damages caused. The licensee isn’t liable for bodily injury or
damages that happen to the intoxicated individual, or to people whowere present with the intoxicated person while the alcohol was
consumed and who knew of their impaired condition.
Arkansas
Ark. Stat. Ann. §§ 16-126-103 through 16-126-105
Civil Liability
An alcoholic beverage retailer can be held liable for damages if it can
be proven that the retailer knowingly sold alcohol to a minor, or a
person who is visibly intoxicated, and the sale was the proximate
cause of any damages caused by that visibly intoxicated person or by
or to that minor.
California
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 25602, 25602.1
Civil and Criminal Liability
Selling or giving an alcoholic beverage to a common drunkard or to a
person who is obviously intoxicated is a misdemeanor. Despite this, a
person who sells or gives an alcoholic beverage to a drunk or
someone who is obviously intoxicated is civilly liable to an injured
person or the estate of such a person for injuries inflicted on that
person as a result of the intoxication of the consumer of the alcoholic
beverage. If an obviously intoxicated minor causes death or injury, the
person who supplied that minor with alcohol is liable for that death or
injury, if the intoxication is the proximate cause of the death or injury.
Colorado
Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 12-47-801, 13-21-103Civil or Criminal Liability
The seller or furnisher of alcoholic beverages are not liable for injury
or death caused by an intoxicated person unless they furnished the
alcoholic beverages to that person and that person is under the age
of 21 and visibly intoxicated. A social host who furnishes an alcoholic
beverage is not liable unless it is proven that the person served was
under the age of 21.
Connecticut
Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 30-102
Civil Liability
If a person sells alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person and the
purchaser, as a consequence of his intoxication, injuries the person or
property of another, the seller may be legally liable for paying
damages to the injured party up to $250,000. If the intoxicated
person is over 21 years of age, no cause of action exists for an
injured party.
Delaware
Del. Code Ann. tit. 4, § 706
Criminal Liability
An establishment with a liquor license shall refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic liquors to any individual if that individual is intoxicated or
appears to be intoxicated. The licensee shall not be liable for
damages claimed to arise from the refusal to sell alcoholic liquors if
such refusal is based on this law, tit. 4 § 706.District of Columbia
D.C. Code Ann. § 25-781
Criminal Liability
An establishment with a liquor license shall refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic liquors to any individual if that individual is intoxicated or
appears to be intoxicated. The licensee shall not be liable for
damages claimed to arise from the refusal to sell alcoholic liquors if
such refusal is based on this law, tit. 4 § 706.
Florida
Fla. Stat. § 768.125
Civil Liability
So long as the drinker is of a lawful drinking age, the person who
sells alcohol to that drinker is not liable for injury or damage resulting
from the intoxication of the person unless the drinker is not of a legal
drinking age or the seller of the alcoholic beverage knows the drinker
is habitually addicted to the use of alcoholic beverages.
Georgia
Ga. Code Ann., §§ 51-1-18, 51-1-40
Civil Liability
The parent or guardian of a underage child have a right of action
against any person who sells or furnishes alcohol to the underage
child without permission of the parent.Seller or provider of alcohol is not liable for injury or property damage
caused by customer intoxication unless the person who causes that
damage was known to soon be driving a motor vehicle and was either
a minor or obviously intoxicated.
Guam
Not Specified
Hawaii
Not Specified
Idaho
Idaho Code Ann. § 23-808
Civil Liability
The server of the alcoholic beverages is not legally liable for injury or
property damage caused by an intoxicated person unless the
intoxicated person was younger than the legal age and the person
who sold or furnished the alcoholic beverages knew or should have
known that the intoxicated person was under the legal age, or if the
intoxicated person was obviously intoxicated at the time or the person
selling or tendering the alcoholic beverages should have known that
the intoxicated person was obviously intoxicated.
Illinois
Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 235, §5/5-21
Civil LiabilityThe person who sells or tenders the alcohol will not be found legally
liable unless the person who caused the injury or property damage
was intoxicated at the time the damage occurred, the vendor sold or
gave alcohol to the intoxicated person who consumed it, the alcohol
consumed by the intoxicated person caused his intoxication, the
injuries resulted because of the intoxication, and the injured party
suffered injury or property damage. A social host is not liable for
providing alcohol at a party or other event.
Indiana
Ind. Code §§ 7.1-5-10-14, 7.1-5-10-15, 7.1-5-10-15.5
Civil and Criminal Liability
Selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages to a person who is obviously
intoxicated is a Class B misdemeanor. It is unlawful to sell or furnish
alcoholic beverages to a person whom he knows to be a habitual
drunkard. It is unlawful for a person to sell or furnish an alcoholic
beverage to another person who is intoxicated, if the first person
knows the second is intoxicated.
Iowa
Iowa Code §§123.49, 123.92
Civil Liability
May not serve alcoholic beverages to an obviously intoxicated
person, or one simulating intoxication. No person selling or furnishing
alcoholic beverages is not civilly liable for injury or property damage
caused by an intoxicated person they served. If anyone serves or
furnishes alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated or underage person if
they knew or should have known that person was intoxicated or
underage.Kansas
Not specified
Kentucky
Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 413.241
Civil Liability
Kentucky has determined that consuming intoxicating beverages
(rather than furnishing or sale of the beverages) is the proximate
cause of any injury or property damage inflicted by an intoxicated
person.
Louisiana
La. Stat. Ann. § 9:2800.1
Civil Liability
Consumption of alcoholic beverages, rather than the sale, is the
proximate cause of any injury or property damage inflicted by an
intoxicated person on himself or another person. No one serving or
furnishing alcohol to a person over the legal age of consumption is
liable to an injured person because of the intoxication of the person to
whom the beverages were sold or served. The insurer of the
intoxicated person is liable for injuries to third persons.
Maine
Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 28-A, §2501-2520
Civil LiabilitySomeone who negligently serves liquor to a minor, or a visibly
intoxicated individual will be liable for damages proximately caused by
that individuals’ consumption of liquor. If the server knew or should
have known that the individual being served is either a minor or visibly
intoxicated. A server is not charged with knowledge of an individual’s
consumption of liquor off the servers premises unless it is obvious
from their appearance or behavior that they are intoxicated. Damages
may be awarded for property damage or bodily injury or death.
Maryland
Not specified
Massachusetts
Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 231, §85T, 60J and ch. 138 §69
Civil and Criminal Liability
No intoxicated person who causes injuries to himself may maintain an
action against the alcohol serving entity unless willful, wanton, or
reckless conduct is present. No alcoholic beverages should be served
to an intoxicated person. If an intoxicated person is served, action in
the superior court shall proceed.
Michigan
Mich. Comp. Law. § 436.1801 et. seq.
Civil and Criminal Liability
Shall not sell or furnish liquor to a minor or to a person who is visibly
intoxicated. A person who suffers personal injury or damage by a
minor or visibly intoxicated person by reason of unlawful selling orfurnishing of the alcohol, if the unlawful sale is found to be the
proximate cause of the damage or injury, the injured party has a right
of action against the person who sold or furnished the alcohol that
caused the intoxication.
Minnesota
Minn. Stat. § 340A.801 et seq.
Civil Liability
A person who is injured or suffers property damage by an intoxicated
person has a right of action for all damages sustained against the
person who illegally sold or furnished the alcohol to the intoxicated
person.
Mississippi
Miss. Code Ann. § 67-3-73
Civil Liability
Consumption of alcoholic beverages, not serving or furnishing, is the
proximate cause of injury or property damage. So long as the alcohol
is legally sold and the injury is suffered off of the licensed premises,
the liability falls with the intoxicated person.
Missouri
Mo. Rev. Stat. § 537.053
Civil and Criminal LiabilityFurnishing or selling alcoholic beverages is not the proximate cause of
injuries inflicted by an intoxicated person, unless the seller knew or
should have known that the alcohol was being sold or furnished to a
person who is underage, in a state of intoxication, or a habitual
drunkard.
Montana
Mont. Code Ann. §27-1-710
Civil Liability
A person or entity furnishing an alcoholic beverage may not be found
liable for injury or damage arising from an event involving the
consumer unless the consumer was under the legal drinking age and
the furnishing person knew that the consumer was underage or did
not make a reasonable attempt to determine the consumer’s age, if
the consumer was visibly intoxicated, or if the furnishing person
forced or coerced the consumption or told the consumer that the
beverage contained no alcohol.
Nebraska
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-401
Civil Liability
A person who sustains injury or property damage as a proximate
result of negligence of an intoxicated minor shall have a cause of
action against a retailer who sold alcoholic liquor to the minor.
Nevada
Nev. Rev. Stat. § 41.1305Civil Liability
A person who sells or furnishes an alcoholic beverage to another
person who is 21 years of age or older is not liable in a civil action for
any damages caused by the person to whom the alcoholic beverage
was served, sold or furnished as a result of the consumption of the
alcoholic beverage.
New Hampshire
N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 507-F:1 et seq.
Civil Liability
Service of alcoholic beverages to a minor or to an intoxicated person
is negligent if the server knows or should have known that the person
being served is a minor or is obviously intoxicated. Action can only be
brought when the service of alcoholic beverages is reckless.
New Jersey
N.J. Rev. Stat. § 2A:22A-4
Civil Liability
A person who sustains personal injury or property damage as a result
of negligent service of alcoholic beverages may recover damages
from the server only if the server is deemed negligent, the injury was
proximately caused by the negligent service of alcoholic beverages,
and the injury was a foreseeable consequence of the negligent
service of alcoholic beverages. A licensed server shall only be
deemed to have been negligent when the server served a visibly
intoxicated person, or served a minor, under circumstances where the
server knew, or reasonably should have known that the person
served was a minor.New Mexico
N.M. Stat. Ann. §§ 41-11-1, 60-7A-16
Civil and Criminal Liability
No civil liability for serving alcohol unless the receiver of the alcohol
was obviously intoxicated, it is reasonably apparent that they are
intoxicated, or the seller knew or should have known from the
circumstances that the purchaser was intoxicated.
New York
N.Y. General Obligations Law § 11-100
Civil Liability
A person injured by reason of intoxication or impairment of a person
under the age of 21 shall have a right to recover actual damages
against any person who knowingly causes such intoxication or
impairment of ability by unlawfully providing alcoholic beverages to
such person with knowledge or reason to believe the person was
under the age of 21.
North Carolina
N.C. Gen. Stat. § 18B-120 et. seq.
Civil Liability
An aggrieved party has a claim for relief for damages if the server
negligently sold or furnished an alcoholic beverage to an underage
person and the consumption of that alcoholic beverage caused the
underage driver’s being subject to an impairing substance at the time
of the injury, and the injury that resulted was proximately caused bythe underage driver’s negligent operation of the vehicle while
impaired.
North Dakota
N.D. Cent. Code §5-01-06.1
Civil Liability
Anyone injured by an obviously intoxicated person has a claim against
any seller or furnisher of alcohol to a person known to be under the
age of 21, an incompetent, or an obviously intoxicated person.
N. Mariana Island
Statutes Unavailable
Ohio
Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 4301.69
Civil Liability
No person who suffers bodily injury or property damage as a result of
the actions of an intoxicated person has any case against the liquor
permit holder who provided the alcohol unless the damage occurred
on the premises or in the parking lot of the liquor permit holder and
was proximately caused by the negligence of the permit holder. A
person has a cause of action against a permit holder for damage
caused by the negligent actions of an intoxicated person happening
away from the permit holders premises only if the permit holder
knowingly sold an intoxicating beverage to either a noticeably
intoxicated person or a person who is under the legal drinking age.Oklahoma
Not specified
Oregon
Or. Rev. Stat. § 471-565
Civil and Criminal Liability
No cause of action based on statute or common law against the
person serving alcoholic beverages even though the person is visibly
intoxicated, unless it can be proven by clear and convincing evidence
that the guest was visibly intoxicated, and the plaintiff did not
substantially contribute to the intoxication of the intoxicated individual.
No seller or furnisher of alcoholic beverages is liable to an injured
third party injured by or through persons under the age of 21 years
who obtained alcoholic beverages from the seller or furnisher unless it
is demonstrated that a reasonable person would have determined
that identification should have been requested or that the identification
that was exhibited was altered or did not accurately describe the
person to whom the liquor was served. Serving alcohol to a person
who is obviously intoxicated is prohibited.
Pennsylvania
Pa. Stat. tit. 47 §4-497
Civil and Criminal Liability
Not liable unless the customer who inflicts the damages was sold,
furnished, or given alcoholic beverages when the said customer was
visibly intoxicated, or was a minor.Puerto Rico
Not specified
Rhode Island
R.I. Gen. Laws §3-14-1 et. seq.
Civil Liability
Negligent sale of liquor to a minor or to a visibly intoxicated person, or
if the seller knows or should have known that the customer was a
minor or was legally intoxicated, will become liable for damages
proximately caused by the consumption of the liquor.
South Carolina
Not Specified
South Dakota
S.D. Codified Laws Ann. §§ 35-4-2, 35-4-78, 35-9-1, 35-9-1.1, 35-
11-1
Civil and Criminal Liability
No server is civilly liable to any injured person for bodily injury or
property damage. Consumption of alcoholic beverages is the
proximate cause of any injury inflicted. Criminally, serving an already
intoxicated person, or a person under the age of 18 is a Class 1
misdemeanor. Serving a person between the ages of 18 and 21 is a
Class 2 misdemeanor.
TennesseeTenn. Code Ann. § 57-10-101, 57-10-102
Civil Liability
Consumption of alcohol is the proximate cause of injuries inflicted
upon another by an intoxicated person. No judgement can be found
against a server of alcoholic beverages unless they served someone
under 21, or they sold the alcoholic beverage to someone who was
visibly intoxicated.
Texas
Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code Ann. § 2.01 et. seq
Civil Liability
Providing, selling, or serving an alcoholic beverage may be the basis
of a statutory cause of action if it can be proven that the individual
sold the beverage was obviously intoxicated, or if the adult, 21 years
of age or older, serves an alcoholic beverage to a minor and that
person is not a parent or legal guardian of the minor.
Utah
Utah Code Ann. §§ 32 B-15-201, 32B-4-404
Criminal and Civil Liability
A person who directly gives or sells an alcoholic beverage to an
apparently intoxicated person, an individual under 21 years old, or a
person the server should know was intoxicated. Knowingly serving
any of these individuals qualifies as a Class A misdemeanor.
Negligent serving any of these individuals qualifies as a Class B
misdemeanor.Vermont
Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 7 §501 et seq.
Civil Liability
A person with a claim against an intoxicated person also has a claim
against a person who helped cause the intoxication if that person is a
minor, is apparently under the influence of intoxicating influence, is
being served after legal serving hours.
Virginia
Not specified
Virgin Islands
Not specified
Washington
Wash. Rev. Code § 66.44.200
Criminal Liability
No person shall sell any liquor to any person apparently under the
influence of liquor.
West Virginia
W. Va. Code §§ 55-7-9, 11-16-18
Civil and Criminal LiabilityIt is unlawful to sell any nonintoxicating beer to any person known to
be insane or known to be a habitual drunkard, or under the age of 21.
Wisconsin
Wis. Stat. §125.305
Civil Liability
A person is immune from civil liability arising out of the act of
procuring alcoholic beverages for or selling alcoholic beverages to a
person unless the provider knew or should have known that the
person was under the legal drinking age, unless the underage person
falsely represents their age, they support their claim with documents
saying they’d reached the legal drinking age, the beverages are
provided in good faith that the minor is of legal drinking age, and the
appearance of the minor is that of a person who is of legal drinking
age.
Wyoming
Wyo. Stat. §12-5-502
Civil Liability
A person is immune from civil liability arising out of the act of
procuring alcoholic beverages for or selling alcoholic beverages to a
person unless the provider knew or should have known that the
person was under the legal drinking age, unless the underage person
falsely represents their age, they support their claim with documents
saying they’d reached the legal drinking age, the beverages are
provided in good faith that the minor is of legal drinking age, and the
appearance of the minor is that of a person who is of legal drinking
age.Appendix I
Checklists—CGL Coverage and
Commercial Umbrella and
Excess Liability Coverage
CGL Coverage Checklist
For most businesses, the liability exposures are the most severe
and at the same time often the most complex of all the
property/casualty exposures. Whereas property, business earnings,
and dishonesty exposures are limited to the value of the property or
income exposed, and workers compensation is limited by statute,
there is no certain monetary ceiling on liability claims that might be
made against an insured. A large liability claim (or claims) against the
insured can put the insured out of business, so it is critically important
that the survey examine with great care both the many liability
exposures and the various insurance coverages that can be written to
protect against them. Note that many exposures can be covered by
various endorsements
Commercial General Liability (CGL) Checklist General
Information
Named Insured:
D/B/A:Address:
City, State:
Phone:
FAX:
E-mail:
Named Insured is a(n):
___ Individual ___ Partnership ___ Corporation
___ Limited Liability Corporation ___ Joint Venture ___ Other
General business operations:
States/territories in which insured has operations:
Location addresses:
Loss control contact name/phone:
General Considerations
____1. Does the insured have any worldwide exposures?
____2. Check insured’s operations, premises owned or occupied,
and payroll and sales records against the Declarations and latest
audit statements of the various liability policies, using the rating
manuals for reference, to determine whether: a)limits of liability are
adequate for probable maximum exposure; note especially the
aggregate limits; b)all premises, operations, products, and activities
of the insured or on the insured’s behalf are recognized and properlyincluded in the coverage; c)rating classifications are proper for all the
exposures insured; d)proper premium bases—area, payroll, sales,
etc.—have been used.
____3.    Obtain premium and loss information for the current
experience period, including reserves for open claims. Compare this
data with experience modifications, if any, under the policies. Also
determine the extent to which any aggregate limits in the policy have
been used up or reduced by payment of loss or by pending claims.
____4.    Are all liability risks of the insured written by the same
insurer? If not, can they be?
____5.    Is insured large enough to be eligible for retrospective
rating? For a program of self-insured retention with excess liability
over the retained limits? Consider possible advantages and
disadvantages for insured with each.
____6.    Umbrella coverage should be considered.
____7.    All liability policies should be checked to see whether they
apply on an occurrence or a claims-made basis. For occurrence
coverage, has any previous policy for the same coverage been on a
claims-made basis? If so—as well as for all present claims-made
policies—ch eck for gaps in the continuity of coverage for
undiscovered claims not covered by a present occurrence policy or,
for a claims-made policy, occurring prior to the policy’s retroactive
date. Has extended reporting period coverage been provided to fill
the gap in coverage? If not, can it be purchased?
____8.    Are limits of liability adequate?
____9.    Has the insured ever filed for bankruptcy?
____10. Has the insured ever been cancelled or non-renewed?____11.    What is the insured’s loss history?
Additional Interests
____12.    Are all necessary additional insureds named in the
policies? Consider such interests as parties with a contractual
interest calling for insurance on their behalf, landlords or tenants, as
well as affiliated or subsidiary companies, individual partners, joint
ventures, etc. Are appropriate certificates of insurance provided to all
additional insureds that require them?
____13.    When additional interests are included, has proper
endorsement been used, showing the actual interest and properly
limiting the coverage to the intended interest only?
____14.    Check for possible conflict between additional insured’s
status as an insured and as named insured’s indemnitor under a hold-
harmless agreement.
____15.    Are there “care, custody or control” property damage
liability exposures—as to premises? As to personal property?
Owners and Contractors Protective
____16.    Does insured utilize independent contractors for any
activities? If so, is owners and contractors protective coverage
provided? Has insured obtained certificates of liability and workers
compensation insurance from these independent contractors, and has
proper premium credit been allowed for the evidence of insurance.
____17.    If insured employs independent contractors, are there any
hold harmless contracts to be considered? Any additional insured
considerations?Products-Completed Operations
____18.    Does insured need products liability coverage? Completed
operations coverage?
____19.    Is vendor’s products coverage required for distributors of
insured’s product. If so, is it provided with proper limits? Are
certificates of insurance required? Have they been provided?
____20.    If insured depends on suppliers’ vendor’s coverage for
products liability protection, are proper certificates of such insurance
obtained? Is the vendor’s products coverage adequate as to limits of
insurance? Does insured handle other products, i.e., outside the
scope of the vendor’s form? Do the insured’s activities include
handling of the products (repackaging, relabeling, etc.)? Should
insured’s own products coverage be provided instead of, or in
addition to, the vendor’s coverage?
____21.    Do any products exposures involve unusually high potential
loss or a prolonged discovery period, or both? Examples include
manufacture of aircraft parts, machine tools, structural materials,
drugs, toxic or hazardous chemicals, and use of radioactive materials.
If so, are substantial limits of liability maintained, and does the
insured have adequate records of old policies that might be called on
for coverage belatedly?
____22.    Does insured have a foreign products liability exposure? If
so, is the definition of policy territory broad enough to cover this
exposure? (Note that under basic CGL provisions product must have
been sold in the United States, its territories or possessions or
Canada, and suit must also be brought there.)
____23.    Does the insured with no other obvious product liability
exposures have an exposure for the miscellaneous or occasional sale
of property—e.g., sale of a motor vehicle, boat, airplane, building,office or plant machinery or equipment? Is product liability coverage
provided for this exposure?
Contractual Liability
____24.    What contracts does the insured have under which the
insured may have assumed liability (insured contracts) for the actions
of others? Are any certificates of insurance required? Have they been
furnished?
____25.    For any “hold harmless” agreements discovered, does the
indemnitor provide liability insurance or only “indemnify” after other
party has paid for defense and judgment?
____26.    For other parties agreeing to hold harmless, are policies
or certificates of insurance required? If so, have they been furnished?
Do they show coverage in accordance with the contract’s
requirements?
Professional Liability
____27.    Do the insured’s operations include performance of any
kind of professional services? On a regular or incidental basis? By
employees or by others on insured’s behalf? For employees or
others?
____28.    Is the professional liability exposure covered by the
general liability insurance or excluded? If covered, does the exposure
go beyond the bodily (or personal) injury and property damage
coverage provided? If so, or if excluded, is professional liability or
errors and omissions insurance provided with substantial limits for
those professional liability exposures found to exist?
Personal Injury/Advertising Injury____29.    Does the liability insurance cover personal injury rather
than just bodily injury?
____30.    Does insured have any advertising, broadcasting, or
television personal injury exposure? Is it insured by them or on their
behalf? Have they assumed advertisers’ liability for others? Is this
exposure insured? By whom?
____31.    Is there a potential exposure to other personal injuries—
discrimination, humiliation, alienation of affections, etc.—not covered
by standard personal injury insurance? Has broader coverage been
provided to include any of these additional kinds of injury?
____32.    Does the insured have any electronic/computer liability
exposure?
Liquor Liability
____33.    Does insured have a liquor liability exposure? If so, is
adequate dram shop or liquor liability insurance provided to cover this
exposure? Consider in this regard the dram shop or liquor liability
situation of the individual state(s) of insured’s operations, to
determine what coverage is appropriate.
Other Exposures
____34.    Does insured sponsor sports teams or other activities
involving employees or other non-employee participants? If so, does
the liability insurance recognize and cover such sponsorship? Is
athletic teams medical payments coverage called for?
____35.    Does the insured have medical payments coverage?
____36.    Partners, officers, directors, or employee benefit trustees
may be exposed to liability claims by employees, other partners,officers, or directors, stockholders, or others, not covered by the
general liability insurance. Is directors and officers liability or
fiduciary liability coverage provided against these exposures? Do any
insureds serve in a business capacity as officers, directors, or
trustees of other organizations? Are they protected by that
organization’s D & O or fiduciary liability coverage? If not, do they or
should they have individual coverage to protect against these
exposures?
____37. Aircraft/watercraft: Does insured have any aircraft or
watercraft exposures, even as little as occasional nonowned or hired
exposures? What is done to cover such exposures?
____38.    Nuclear energy: Does the insured operate any nuclear
facility to which the nuclear exclusion applies? Has insured provided
necessary separate coverage for this exposure? With maximum
available limits?
____39.    Has liability for punitive damages been considered?
____40.    Is insured engaged in any gas, oil, or other underground
operations?
____41.    Does insured have a pollution liability exposure? Is
environmental impairment liability insurance provided? Is it obtainable
for this insured? With adequate limits? Can and should it be offered?
____42.    Does the insured lease employees? Does the insured use
volunteers?
____43.    Does the insured utilize commercial drones? Does the
insured have the appropriate authorizations to operate commercial
drones?____44.    Have all potential cyber issues been considered? Does the
insured have customer information stored on a computer? Does the
insured have a program in place for protecting cyberdata? Does the
insured need cyber coverage?
____45.    Does the insured have any exotic exposures, such as
petting zoos, riding lessons, hot air balloon rides, or other
entertainment or unusual exposures?
____46.    Have all known concealed-carry exposures been
addressed?
Operating Practices
____43.    Does the insured have an active and effective loss control
program? If not, is the insured receptive to such a program, with help
and guidance from the insurer?
____44.    Has the insured established and maintained adequate
records in areas affecting insurance coverage and loss control? If
not, a genuine service can be rendered by including in the survey
recommendations for adequate record maintenance. This is
especially important for insureds with potentially “long tail” product or
professional liability exposures that may require documentation of
past coverages or practices long beyond the time that most records
are normally kept.
____45.    Does the insured understand the duties in event of a claim
or loss?
____46.    Any leased workers? Any temporary workers?
Commercial Umbrella and Excess Liability
Coverage ChecklistBecause there is no universally accepted standard
umbrella/excess policy form, significant differences often exist
between the scope of coverage between primary policies and
umbrella or excess layers. It is therefore important to review the
coverage being purchased carefully in order to identify differences
between underlying insurance and various layers of excess and
umbrella liability coverage.
Traditionally, umbrella coverage served three functions: (1) to
increase primary limits, (2) to broaden primary coverage, and (3) to
provide dropdown coverage when underlying aggregates are reduced
or exhausted and in some instances when there is no underlying
coverage for a loss.
Regular and continuous changes to typical underlying ISO based
liability coverage and litigation to define the meaning of umbrella
coverage make it more important than ever that insureds review
carefully their umbrella coverage to see that it provides at least the
same (or broader) coverage as the primary policy for known risks.
We briefly describe below some important areas to review.
However, this list by no means addresses all of the areas that should
be reviewed.
1.    Defense expenses should be covered, excess of underlying
insurance or excess of the self-insured retention (SIR). If
defense expenses are included in the definition of ultimate
net loss (not paid in addition to the umbrella policy limits),
consider increasing the umbrella limit above what you
normally would buy.
2.    The umbrella should cover liability assumed under any
contract, not just written and oral.3.    Learn whether the policy states (clearly) when the defense
obligation arises and how it will respond if the underlying
insurer refuses to defend. Also, if the umbrella policy
indemnifies rather than paying on behalf, look for wording
clarifying how this affects timing of the payment of defense
costs.
4.    Read the policy to determine whether it states that it will
cover only tort liability or if coverage under the policy
extends to losses encompassed by the policy even if the
property damage, bodily injury, etc. is attributable to a
breach of contract.
5.    If the underlying policy includes broad form property
damage coverage check the umbrella wording to ensure it
provides similar coverage.
6.    The definition of occurrence should include events. It should
not be limited to accidents. In addition to bodily injury and
property damage, most umbrellas also cover advertising
and personal injuries (libel, slander, false arrest, etc.), which
may not be accidentally caused.
7.    Be sure the umbrella covers loss of use of property not
injured or destroyed by an occurrence. The ISO definition of
property damage (used in most CGL policies) provides this
coverage. Some umbrellas may not.
8.    The definition of persons insured should be broad and easy
to understand. It should automatically cover all of your
subsidiaries, affiliates, managed or newly acquired
companies. Check carefully for coverage of past and
present partnerships and joint ventures.9.    The definition of personal injury should encompass injuries
such as discrimination, mental anguish, humiliation, fright,
shock, and assault and battery. In both the primary and
umbrella policy, this coverage should be triggered by an
offense.
10.  Some umbrellas exclude punitive damages. Avoid this, as it
is an issue determined by the laws of each state, which
vary.
11.  All underlying policies should have the same effective dates
as the umbrella. Non- concurrent dates can create a
coverage gap between primary and excess policies.
12.  Most umbrellas should cover non-owned aircraft and
watercraft, regardless of the existence of underlying
coverage. Aircraft and watercraft restrictions often are
subtle. Carefully review policy exclusions and other
provisions regarding possible coverage limitations for these
exposures.
These are only a few of the areas where coverage gaps between
primary and umbrella coverage may occur. Your policies should be
carefully reviewed to avoid gaps in coverage. Use the following
detailed checklist to better understand the scope and limitation of
coverage. The following coverage checklist can help readers identify
many such discrepancies and help arrange the broadest possible
coverage.
Umbrella and Excess Liability Checklist
General Information
Named Insured:D/B/A:
Address:
City, State:
Phone:
Named Insured is a(n):
_____Individual _____Partnership _____Corporation
____Limited Liability Corp. _____Joint Venture _____Other
General business operations:
States/territories in which insured has operations:
States/territories in which insured may begin operations within next
twelve months:
Loss control contact name/phone:
Coverages
____1.    Umbrella form?
____2.    Excess liability form?
____3.    Umbrella and excess liability form?
____4.    Claims-made form?
____5.    Occurrence form?____6. Limit of liability per occurrence?
____7.    Aggregate limit of liability?
____8.    Quote aggregate limit on per location or per project basis?
____9.    Have additional limits of liability been quoted?
____10.    Is there an SIR for claims not covered by the underlying
policies?
____11.    What is the SIR amount?
____12.    First dollar defense coverage?
____13.    Is the schedule of underlying insurance accurate and are
all policies listed on it in effect?
____14.    Ninety day notice of cancellation or nonrenewal?
____15.    Flat premium?
____16.    Auditable premium?
____17.    Pay-on-behalf of form?
____18.    Indemnification/reimbursement-type form?
____19.    Review definition of personal injury—does it include mental
anguish? Emotional distress?
____20.    Defense in addition to limit of liability?
____21.    Defense included within limit of liability?____22.    What is provision for policy dropping down to replace
insolvent underlying insurance?
____23.    Real property care, custody, control exclusion?
____24.    Personal property care, custody, control exclusion?
____25.    Review watercraft coverage/exclusion provisions.
____26.    Review aircraft/aircraft parts coverage/exclusion
provisions.
____27. Does coverage apply over UM/UIM underlying coverage?
____28.    Are all layers written on concurrent forms?
____29.    Is coverage concurrent with primary policy forms?
____30.    How are unnamed joint ventures and partnerships
addressed?
____31.    Broad form named insured endorsement?
____32.    Delete any requirement to reinstate underlying insurance
that has been diminished or exhausted by claim payment(s)?
____33.    Are foreign liability policies scheduled on underlying (if
applicable)?
____34.    What is policy territory?
____35.    If layered program, is each layer at least as broad as the
primary excess or umbrella policy?____36.    Verify no exclusion on employers liability for occupational
disease.
____37.    Are there any professional liability exclusions?
____38.    How are punitive damages treated?
____39.    Quote named peril or sudden/accidental pollution as an
option?
____40.    Are all umbrella/excess liability policies as broad as or
broader than policies listed on the schedule of underlying insurance?
____41.    Are all underlying excess coverages required by each
layer of excess insurance actually in force as required?
____42.    Are claim reporting/adjustment provisions the same across
all layers?I n d e x
additional coverage endorsements 168
advertising injury 7, 84, 91-109, 94, 200-201, 206, 247, 254, 296, 364
exclusion 200
aggregate limits 122, 126-127, 133, 148-150, 154, 262-263, 276, 278, 281, 318, 346, 361, 409,
424
discussion of 148
impact on excess or umbrella 149
aircraft exclusion 55
alienated premises exclusion 64, 67
amendment of limits endorsements 262
auto exclusion 57-58, 115, 289, 241
bodily injury 1-89, 218, 281
breach of contract exclusion 473
Bring Your Own Bottle (BYOB) 35
Broad Form Property Damage (BFPD) 21, 64, 71, 246-247, 364
business liability 136, 353-355
businessowners aggregate limit 361-362
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 86-87, 109, 295-296, 302
care, custody, or control exclusion 58, 64-70, 218, 230, 375, 378-384, 431
chronology of changes affecting the pollution exclusion (f.) 3, 41
claims-made endorsements 263
claims-made policies 129
claims-made trigger 117
cleanup costs 2, 40-41, 49, 51-55, 100, 305, 375
co-employee exclusion 140
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) 41
conditions 152-165, 312, 343, 362
contractual liability exclusion 15, 23, 27, 30, 104, 238-239, 355
Coverage B—personal and advertising injury liability 15, 91, 296
coverage territory 1, 7-10, 112, 218, 258-259, 276, 282, 297, 317-321, 334, 355
coverage triggers 1, 11, 92, 117
criminal acts exclusion 103
“damages because of,” 1-3
deductible endorsements 167defense costs 484
assumed under contract 15, 19-21, 30, 238
relationship to limits of insurance 15
definitions 139, 319, 350, 363
distribution of material in violation of statutes 86, 108
dual capacity claims 38
duty to defend 461
allocation 12
insurer’s duty 92
electronic chatrooms or bulletin boards exclusion 107, 300
electronic data 85, 170, 240, 243, 264, 267, 359
employee 138, 198, 264
employers liability 36
dual capacity claims 38
third-party-over actions 39
endorsements for certain types of risks 217
endorsements 150, 167-271, 329
entrustment, negligent 55-56
exclusion
endorsements 35, 141, 167, 178, 194, 206, 216, 270, 331, 466
of specific accidents, etc 131, 263
Coverage A 22, 87, 100, 108, 115, 284, 304
executive officer 136, 138, 140, 188, 307, 320, 324
expected or intended injury exclusion 22, 257, 397, 403, 465
extended reporting periods 12, 117-122, 124, 133, 160, 263
faulty workmanship exclusion 64, 70-71, 78
fiduciary 169, 221, 251, 253, 331, 333
fire damage 27, 66, 69, 87-88, 148, 150, 203
forms 167
general policy provisions
co-employee exclusion 140
“who is an insured” 135, 306, 360
impaired property 74, 78-84, 105, 180, 293, 320, 358-359, 431, 452-458, 472
exclusion of property, damage to 40, 381
infringement of copyright, patent, trademark, or trade secret exclusion 105
insured contracts 25, 180, 200, 239
insuring agreements
Coverage A 1Coverage B 91
Coverage C 111
intentional injury exclusion 94, 232, 398, 402, 465
joint ventures, s e e undeclared partnerships
knowing violation of rights of another exclusion 462
leased worker 37, 139, 168, 363, 477
legally obligated 1-3, 18, 52, 91, 269, 278-279, 283, 289, 318-319, 327, 338, 351, 403
liability in absence of contract 24
libel 93, 98, 101-102, 298, 303, 324
limits of insurance 15, 135, 147, 262, 311, 341, 361
aggregate 334, 342
applicable endorsements 150
damage to premises rented to “you,” 65, 69, 148, 151, 155, 203, 362
each occurrence 17, 27, 147-151, 311-312, 342-343, 411, 423
medical expense 15, 92, 111, 123, 147-151, 222, 238, 355, 359-363
other limits 150
personal and advertising injury 84, 91-109, 200, 247, 254, 296, 364
liquor liability exclusion 31-35, 206-207, 251-252, 286-287, 356, 467
amendment of 206
loss of use 479
material published
prior to policy period exclusion 102, 299
with knowledge of falsity exclusion 101, 298
medical payments
exclusions 112
insuring agreement 111
mobile equipment
2004 Revision Affecting Mobile Equipment 62
defined 55-58, 143
montrose provision 11, 92, 120-121, 298, 445
negligent entrustment 55-56
newly acquired organizations 145, 265, 270, 361
nuclear energy exclusion 360
occurrence 6-7
defined 7
trigger provisions 11, 119operators of mobile equipment 62, 143
other insurance 154
condition 152, 154, 156, 158, 175-176
provisions of claims-made policy 117
personal and advertising injury 84, 91, 94, 200, 247, 254, 296, 364
pollution coverage options 52
pollution exclusion 41, 53, 108, 367, 466
professional liability exclusions 141, 239
professional services 195, 217, 219, 221, 270, 358, 479
property being worked on exclusion 69
property loaned to named insured exclusion 67
property not physically injured exclusion 78
quality or performance of goods—failure to conform to statements exclusion 105, 299, 303
railroad protective exclusion 24, 27
real estate managers, custodians, and legal representatives 142
recall of products, work, or impaired property exclusion 83
relationship of defense costs to limits of insurance 15
retroactive date 123
sistership liability 83
slander 98
special products problem 133
sudden and accidental defined 225
suit defined 15, 154
Superfund (CERCLA) 41
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) 41
supplementary payments 16, 304, 354
temporary worker, defined 37, 139, 168, 320, 322, 327, 360, 471
terrorism endorsement options 211
third party actions 141
third-party-over actions 39
trade dress defined 99, 106, 270, 299, 303, 324, 462, 474
triggers of coverage
claims-made 117
Coverage A 11
Coverage B 92
triple-trigger theory 118unauthorized use of another’s name or product exclusion 107
undeclared partnerships and joint ventures 146
volunteer workers 138, 187, 198, 210
volunteers, as insureds 113, 139
watercraft exclusion 21, 57, 199, 210, 245, 266, 291
“who is an insured” 120, 135, 140-146, 176, 186-189, 192, 198, 222, 231, 252-255, 265, 306,
360
workers compensation exclusion 35, 114
wrong description of prices exclusion 105
“you” and other designated persons 135
“your product,” exclusion of 384, 462
“your work,” exclusion of 67, 74, 384, 468, 482Case Index
Note that some cited cases are not found in this coverage guide but
are listed for the reader’s information.
A.D. Irwin Investments, Inc. v. Great American Insurance Company 415
A.J. Gregory v. Tennessee Gas Company 380
AB Green Gansevoort, LLC v. Peter Scalamandre & Sons, Inc. 193, 469
ACE American Ins. Co v. RC2 Corporation, Inc. 8
Advanced Network v. Peerless Ins. Co. 6, 438
Aetna Casualty and Surety Company v. Griss 411
Aetna Fire Underwriting v. Southwestern Engineering Co. 29
Aetna Ins. Co. v. Aaron 66
Air Products & Chemicals, Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Company 415
Aitchison v. Founders Ins. Co. 219
Aker v. Sabatier 444
Allied World National Assurance Co. v. Great Divide Ins. Co. 483
Allstate Insurance Co. v. Steinemer 406
Allstate Insurance Company v. The West American Insurance Company 235
Altman Contractors, Inc. v. Crum & Forster Specialty Ins. Co. 472
American Casualty Company of Reading, Pennsylvania v. Amsouth Bank 440
American Casualty Company v. Hartford Insurance Company 446
American Family Mutual Insurance Company v. Purdy 406
American Foreign Insurance Co. v. Jerry’s Sport Center 14
American Home Products Corporation v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 424
American Indemnity Company v. McQuaig 419
American Insurance Company v. Crown Packaging International 462
American Mercury Insurance Group v. Urban 437
American Motorists Insurance Company v. Trane 420
American Policyholders Insurance Co. v. Michota 447
American States Insurance Company v. Technical Surfacing, Inc. 383
American Trailer Service v. Home Insurance Company 74
American Western Home Insurance Company v. Donnelly Distribution 495
American White Cross Laboratories v. Continental Insurance Company 186
Amoco Production Company v. Hydroblast Corporation 382
Antles v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Co. 447
Appalachian Insurance Company v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 421Argent v. Brady 461
Armstrong World Industries, Inc. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Company 423
Atlantic Mutual Insurance Co. v. McFadden 382
Attain Specialty Ins. Co. v. Chouteau Property Management, Inc. 477
Attain Specialty Ins. Co. v. Szetela 490
Auto Club Group Insurance Company v. Burchell 409
Auto-Owners Insurance Company v. American Building Materials 395
Auto-Owners Insurance Company v. Southeastern Car Wash Systems 491, 492
Awards Deport, LLC. V. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 471, 472
Axis Ins. Co. v. Stewart 477
B.L.G. Enterprises d/b/a The Alley Bar v. First Financial Ins. Co. 32
Bacon v. American Insurance Co. 1
Bank of California, N.A. v. Opie 445
Bankers Trust Co. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity 41
Barnette v. Hartford Insurance Group 461
Bedford Affiliates v. Harvey Manheimer 378
Benton v. Canal Ins. Co. 459
Bentz v. Mutual Fire, Marine & Inland Ins. Co. 89
Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Aetna Life 7 Casualty Co. 460
Bituminous Casualty Corp. v. Fulkerson 389
Black Bull Contracting, LLC v. Indian Harbor Ins. Co. 471
Board of Regents of the University of Minnesota v. Royal Insurance Company 378
Boggs v. Aetna Casualty and Surety 414
Boston Old Colony Ins. Co. v. Tiner Associates Inc. 392
Boswell v. Travelers Indemnity Co. 391
Boulevard Investment Company v. Capitol Indemnity Corporation 371
BP America, Inc. v. State Auto Property & Casualty Insurance Company 461
Brockbank v. Travelers Insurance Co. 447
Brown v. Concord Group Insurance Company 402
Budofsky v. The Hartford Insurance Company 379
Burd v. Sussex Mutual Insurance Co. 411
Buss v. The Superior Court of Los Angeles County 14
C. Brewer and Co., Ltd. v. Marine Indem. Ins. Co. of America 203
Caci International Inc. v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. 9
Canopius US Ins., Inc. v. Middleton 480
Carbone, Inc. v. General Accident Insurance Company 461
Caribou Four Corners, Inc. v. Truck Ins. Exchange 460
Carpenters v. Lovell’s Lounge and Grill, LLC. 487
Casualty Indemnity Exchange v. City of Sparta 380
Casualty Reciprocal Exchange v. Thomas 408Cathay Mortuary v. United Pacific Insurance Co. 18
Centennial Insurance Company v. Ryder Truck Rental, Inc. 459
Central Illinois Public Service Company v. Allianz Underwriters Insurance Company 380
Ceramic Tiles of Fairfield, Inc. v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Company 392
Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s v. Valiant Insurance Company 415
Certain Underwriters at Lloyds, London v. Arch Specialty Ins. Co. 489
Chancler v. American Hardware Mutual Insurance Co. 74
Chief Industries, Inc. v. Great Northern Insurance Company 396
Chrysler Corp. v. Insurance Co. of North America 459
Chrysler Insurance Co. v. Greenspoint Dodge of Houston 101
Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Vita Food Products, Inc. 486
Cincinnati Insurance Company v. H.D. Smith 472, 473
City of Ypsilanti v. Appalachian Ins. Co. 88
Cogswell Farm Condominium Association v. Tower Group 399
Collin v. American Empire Insurance Company 439
Columbia Cas. Co. v. Plantation Pipe Line Co. 488
Columbia Casualty Company v. Abdou 494
Commercial Standard Ins. Co. v. American General Ins. Co. 460
Consulting Engineers v. INA 93
Continental Casualty Company v. Cole 249
Continental Casualty Company v. Rapid-American Corp. 383
Cooling v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co. 74
Cotton States Mutual Ins. Co. v. Crosby 3
Country Mutual v. Waldman Mercantile Company 386
County of Westchester v. Edo Corp. 390
Crane Service & Equipment Corp. v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company 389
Cypress Point Condominium Ass’n Inc. v. Adria Towers, L.L.C. 478
D’Antoni v. Sara Mayo Hospital 445, 448
Danyo v. Argonaut Insurance Company 446
Decker Plastics Inc. v. West Bend Mutual Ins. Co. 474
Delta & Pine Land Company v. Nationwide Agribusiness Company, Nationwide Mutual
Insurance Company 256
Desert Mountain Properties Limited Partnership v. Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Company
456
Dimmit Chevrolet, Inc. v. Southeastern Fidelity Insurance Corp. 378
Doe Run Resources Corp. v. American Guarantee & Liability Ins. 476, 477
Dorchester Mutual Fire Ins. v. First Kostas Corp. 82
Doty v. Safeco Ins. Co. 61
Downey Venture v. LMI Insurance Co. 93
Doyle v. Allstate Ins. Co. 88
Drake Williams Steel, Inc., v. Continental Cas. Co. 489Drought v. Nawrocki 96
Dublin Building Systems v. Selective Insurance Company 395
Eagle-Picher Industries v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 423
Eisenbarth v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. 386
Elcar Mobile Homes v. Baxter 391
Electric Power Systems Int’l, v. Zurich American Ins. Co. 478
Eli Lilly and Company v. Home Insurance Company 424
Eljer Manufacturing, Inc. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 442
Emile M. Babst Company, Inc. v. Nichols Construction Corp. 388
Empire Associates v. North River Ins. Co. 5
Employers Mutual Liability Ins. Co. v. Houston Fire & Casualty Ins. Co. 460
Erie Insurance Group v. Alliance Environmental 445
Essex Ins. Co. v. Soy City Sock Co. 388
Essex Insurance Co. v. Café Dupont 34, 366
Essex Insurance Company v. Avondale Mills, Inc. 383
Evanston Ins. Co. v. Lapolla Insustries, Inc. 471
E-Z Loader Boat Trailers, Inc. v. Travelers Indemnity Co. 205
Family Service of Rochester, Inc. v. National Union Fire Insurance Company of Pittsburgh, PA
380
Farmers Insurance Group v. Sessions 409
Federated Mutual Ins. v. Grapevine Excavation 82
Fina v. Travelers Insurance Company 415
Fire Insurance Exchange v. Berray 410
First Newton National Bank v. General Casualty Co. 248
Food Pro International v. Farmers Insurance Exchange 445
Freidline v. Shelby Ins. Co. 50
Friestad v. Travelers Indemnity Company 397
Gamble Farm Inn v. Selective Insurance Company 383
Garden Sanctuary v. INA 88
Gardner v. Romano 96
Garfield Slope Housing v. Public Service Mutual Ins. Co. 49
Gaylord Chemical v. Propump 82
Gediman v. Anheuser Busch 169
Georgia Farm Bureau Mutual Ins., Co. v. Smith 476
Gilbane Building Co./TDX Construction Corp. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins. Co. 485
Goodwin v. Wright 401
Grain Dealers Mutual Insurance v. Cady 146
Greenville County v. South Carolina Insurance Reserve Fund 378
Grefer v. Travelers Ins. Co. 390Grennell Mutual Reinsurance Company v. Wollak Construction, Inc. 442
GTE Sw., Inc. v. Bruce 101
Guilford Industries, Inc., v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company 379
Hamilton Die Cast v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty 417
Harbor Ins. co. v. Argonaut Ins. 94
Harbor Ins. Co. v. Lewis 429
Harbor Ins. Co. v. OMNI Construction 240
Harford County v. Harford Mutual Insurance Company 439
Harleysville Worcester Insurance Company v. Paramount Concrete 466
Harris v. Fireman’s Fund Indemnity Co. 447
Harris v. Richards 408
Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. v. Continental Casualty Co. 459
Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. v. The Regent Nursing Home 448
Hartford Casualty Company v. Cruse 389
Hartzell Industries, Inc. v. Federal Insurance Company 436
Hawkeye Insurance Company v. John Davis dba Davis Construction 418
Hendrickson v. Zurich American Insurance Company 436
Herbison v. Employers Insurance Co. of Alabama 390
Heritage Ins. Co. v. Cilano 31
Hi-Port, Inc. v. American International Specialty Lines Insurance Company 398
Holmes v. Employers Casualty Company 452
Holsum Foods Division of Harvest States Cooperatives v. The Home Insurance Company
397
Holter v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. 392
Honeycomb Systems, Inc. v. Admiral Insurance Company 415
Hormel Foods Corp. v. Northbrook Prop. and Cas. Ins. Co. 429
Houston Building Service, Inc. v. American General Fire and Casualty Company 401
Hydro Systems, Inc. v. Continental Insurance Company 380
INA v. Forrest City Country Club 97
INA v. Forty-Eight Insulations, Inc. 423
Incorporated Village of Cedarhurst v. Hanover Insurance Company 382
Indiana Lumbermens Insurance Company v. PrimeWood, Inc., v. Travelers Insurance Co.
465
Insurance Company of North America v. Cease Elec., Inc. 442
Insurance Company of North America v. Forty-Eight Insulations 118
International Ampitheatre Company v. Vanguard Underwriters Insurance Company 430
International Derrick & Equipment Co. v. Buxbaum 391
Just v. Land Reclamation, Ltd. 466Kapelus v. United Title Guarantee Co. 19
Keene Corp. v. INA 118, 242
Keepes v. Doctors Convalescent Center, Inc. 448
Kelly v. State Automobile Ins. Assn 459
Keystone Spray Equipment v. Regis Ins. Co. 74
Kim v. State Farm Fire & Casualty Company 383
Kinsale Insurance Company v. Mojoes of Joliet 481
Knoor v. Commercial Casualty Insurance Co. 447
Kotlar v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. 425
Kraemer Building Corp. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co. 471
L.L. Jarrell Construction Co. v. Columbia Casualty Co. 388
Laconia Rod & Gun Club v. Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. 32
League of Minnesota Cities Insurance Trust v. City of Coon Rapids 379
Liberty Life Ins. Co. v. Travelers Indemnity Co. of IL 270
Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Company v. MI Windows & Doors 395
Liberty Mutual Fire. Ins. Co. v. Zurich American Ins. Co. 485
Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. v. Iowa National Mutual Ins. Co. 460
Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. v. FAG Bearings Corp. 466
Liberty Mutual Insurance Company v. Zurich Insurance Company 387
Long v. Coates 412
LSJ Technologies v. U.S. Fire Insurance Company 415
Madison Construction Company v. Harleysville Mutual Insurance Company 384
Mark v. Sunshine Plaza, Inc. 473, 474
Marlin v. Wetzel County Board of Education 428
Marwell Construction, Inc. v. Underwriters of Lloyd’s London 460
Marx v. Hartford Accident and Casualty Indemnity Co. 449
Maryland Casualty Co. v. American Fidelity & Casualty Co. 459
Mason v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. 450
Mastrom Inc. v. Continental Casualty Company 449
Maurice Pincoffs Company v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company 419
McCord, Condron & McDonald, Inc. v. Twin City Fire Ins. Co. 389
McGuire v. Curry 34, 366
McLouth Steel Corp. v. Mesta Machine Co. 391
Mead v. Travelers Insurance Company 387
Mecca Contracting v. Scottsdale Insurance Company 486
Merchants Ins. Co. of New Hampshire, Inc. v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty 180
Meridian Mutual Insurance Company v. Kellman 383
Mesa Underwriters Specialty Ins. Co., v. Myers 474
Michigan Chemical Corporation v. American Home Assurance Company 421
Mid-Continent Casualty Company v. Kipp Flores Architects 484, 485Miller v. Mardak 472
Minkler v. Safeco Insurance Company of America 458
Mirpad v. California Insurance Guarantee Assoc 97
Mitchell, Best, & Visnic, Inc. v. Travelers Property Casualty Corp. 439
Modell & Company v. General Insurance Company of Trieste 380
Montana Rail Link, Inc. v. The Travelers Indemnity Company 267
Montrose Chemical Corp. v. Admiral Ins. Co. 5, 120, 454
Multnomah County v. Oregon Automobile Insurance Co. 451
National Fire Ins. Co. of Hartford v. E. Mishan & Sons Inc. 484
National Union Fire v. Structural Systems Tech 71, 77
Natural Gas Pipeline v. Odom Offshore Surveys 29
Nelson v. Union Wire Rope Corp. 164
North American Specialty Insurance Company v. Georgia Gulf Corporation 380
Northland Insurance Company v. Zurich American Insurance Company 460
Northern Insurance Co. of New York v. Superior Court for the City and County of San
Francisco 446
Oak Crest Construction Company v. Austin Mutual Insurance Company 417
Ocean Accident and Guaranty Corp. v. Hertzberg’s Inc. 452
Ohio Casualty Ins. Co. v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co. 459
Old Dominion Insurance Company v. Stellar Concepts & Design 474, 476
Olympic, Inc. v. Providence Washington Insurance Co. 25
Owens-Illinois v. Aetna Casualty and Surety 421, 424
Owners Insurance Co. v. Clayton 206
Pablo v. Moore 57
Patz v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. 278, 466
PCS Nitrogen Fertilizer, L.P. v. U.S. Filter/Arrowhead, Inc. et al. 464
Pekin Insurance Company v. American Country Insurance Company 431
Penn-America Ins. Co. v. Peccadillos 33, 366, 615
Pennsylvania National Mutual Casualty Insurance Company v. Lewis 493
Penske Truck Leasing Company v. Republic Western Insurance Company 460
Pepsi-Cola Bottling Company of Charleston v. Indemnity Insurance 460
Peterborough Oil Company v. Great American Insurance Co. 206
Phil Schroeder, Inc. v. Royal Globe Insurance Company 393
Philadelphia Electric Co. v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. 429
Physicians Insurance Company v. Swanson 407
Pinkerton & Laws v. Royal Insurance Company of America 463
Princeton Express and Surplus Ins. Co. v. DM Ventures USA LLC of America 476, 477
Prudential Property and Casualty Insurance Company v. Swindal 407QBE Ins. Corp. v. Walters 480
Queen City Farms, Inc. v. The Central National Insurance Company of Omaha 410
Rajspic v. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co. 412
Regional Bank of Colorado v. St. Paul Fire & Marine 382
Reliance Insurance Company v. Aetna Casualty and Surety Company 461
Riverside Insurance Co. v. Wiland 407
Rolette County v. Western Casualty & Surety Co. 205
Rome v. Commonwealth Edison Co. 27
Ronalco, Inc. v. Home Insurance Company 392
Seger v. Yorkshire Ins. Co., Ltd. 487
Shade Foods v. Innovative Products Sales & Marketing 82, 466
Shankle v. VIP Lounge, Inc. 387
Shelby Mutual Ins. Co. v. Schuitema 460
Shell Oil Co. v. AC&S, Inc. 429
Simmon v. Homatas 35, 366
Sola Basic Industries, Inc. v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company 442
Spoleta Construction, LLC v. Aspen Ins. UK Limited 486
Spring Vegetable Company v. Hartford Casualty Insurance Company 398
St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Wabash Fire & Casualty Ins. Co. 459
St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company v. Asbury 449
St. Paul Fire & Marine v. Campbell County School Dist. No. 1 205
St. Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company v. Schilling 460
Standard Fire Ins. Co. v. Chester-O’Donley & Associates 83, 463
State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v. Bomke 406
State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v. Groshek 407
State Farm Fire and Casualty Co. v. Worthington 406
State Farm Fire and Casualty Company v. Wicka 412
Stewart Warner Corp. v. Burns Intern. Sec. Services, Inc. 388
Stonelight Tile v. California Insurance Guaranty Association 415
Superior Fuels, Inc. v. Nationwide Agribusiness Ins. Co. 490
Superperformance International v. Hartford Casualty Co. 103
Supreme Laundry Service v. Hartford Casualty Ins. Co. 98
Sumitomo Marine & Fire Ins. Co. v. Southern Guar. and Columbia National Ins. Co. 428
Tankersley v. Insurance Company of North America 450
Textron Inc. v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Company 378
The Travelers Indemnity Company of America v. Moore & Associates, Inc. 404
Thrift-Mart, Inc. v. Commercial Union Assurance Cos 412
Titan Holdings Syndicate, Inc. v. City of Keene 381
Todd Shipyards Corp. v. Turbine Services, Inc. 397Town of Goshen v. Grange Mutual Ins. Co. 95
Travelers Indemnity Co. of America v. Portal Healthcare Solutions, L.L.C. 490–491
Travelers Ins. Co. v. American Casualty Co. 459
Travelers Insurance Company v. Eljer Mfg., Inc. 438
Travelers Insurance v. De Bothuri and P.L.A 5
Turner & Newall v. American Mutual Liability Ins. Co. 137
U.S. Bronze Powders, Inc. v. Commerce & Industry Company 380
U.S. Metals v. Liberty Mutual Group 482
USX Corporation v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Company and Turner Construction Company
260
Underwriters Safety and Claims, Inc. v. Travelers Property Cas. Co. 476
United Services Automobile Association v. Elitzky 408
United States v. United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co. 13
United Stationers Supply Company v. Zurich American Insurance Company 431
USX Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co. 260
Uvino v. Harleysville Worcester Insurance Company 479, 480
Vandenberg v. Superior Court of Sacramento 25
Vinup v. Joe’s Const., LLC. 481
Vogel v. Russo 442
Water Well Solutions Service Group Inc. v. Consolidated Ins. Co. 472
Weedo v. Stone-EBrick 398
West Hills Development Co. v. Chartis Claims, Inc. 488
Westchester Fire Insurance Co. v. City of Pittsburg, Kansas 382
Westchester Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v. Keller Transport, Inc. 490
Western World Insurance Company v. Carrington 400
Western World Insurance Company v. Stack Oil, Inc. 380
Westfield Insurance Co. v. FCL Builders, Inc. 193
Westfield Insurance Company v. FCL Builders, Inc. 469
Wisconsin Label Corporation v. Northbrook Property & Casualty Insurance Company 441
Worcester Mutual Insurance Company v. Marnell 461
Wrecking Corporation of America, Virginia, Inc. v. Insurance Company of North America 422,
438
Yakima Cement Products Company v. Great American Insurance Company 416
Zook v. Arch Specialty Ins. Co. 489