Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 04.doc COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM  PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT  
This COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM  PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT (this 
“Agreement ”) is entered into and effective as of June 1, 2021 (the “Effective Date ”), by and between 
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Services, LLC , a Delaware Limited Liability Company , with offices at 30 
Rockefeller Plaza, New York, NY 10112 -0015 (“ DTTS ”), as agent for its parent, Deloitte Global 
Services Limited, a UK com pany limited by guarantee, also with offices at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, New 
York, NY 10112 -0015 (“ DGSL ”), and International SOS Assistance, Inc. , a Washington  corporation with 
offices at 3600 Horizon Blvd., Suite 300, Trevose, PA 19053 (“Intl.SOS ” or “Vendor ”) 
WHEREAS, DGSL  and Vendor (as defined below) wish to enter into an agreement in order to 
enable DGSL to purchase certain services from Vendor, for itself and for the other Deloitte Firms 
(defined below) who choose to participate in this Agreement, as more fully set forth herein.  
NOW , THEREFORE, for good and valuable consideration, the adequacy of which is hereby 
acknowle dged, DGSL and Vendor hereby agree as follows:  
I. CERTAIN DEFINITIONS  
As used in this Agreement, the following terms have the following definitions:  
A. “Alternative License Agreement ” means  any “shrink -wrap ,” “click -wrap” , or “click -
through”  license agreement, “terms of use” , or similar documents or terms (whether in hard -copy, 
electronic, web -based or other form and whether existing prior to or after the Effective Date) that 
is related to a ny Service or software, or any part of the Service or software .  
B. “Assistance Center ” means an one of Intl.SOS’ designated locations staffed with 
medical and security specialists 24 hours per day, 365 days per year, to handle requests from 
Covered Individua ls for advice or assistance.  
C. “Authorized Person ” means the person or persons designated by the Subscriber as 
notified in writing to Vendor from time to time as authorized to act on behalf of the Subscriber 
with regards to the attached Service Levels and Su pport Schedule under this Agreement.  
D. “Certificate of Subscription ” means the document substantially in the form attached 
hereto, or any amendment(s) thereto approved by both Parties, identifying the Services , 
Subscriber, Program Number, Commencement Date, Term, Renewal Date, Subscription Fee and 
other information as may be agreed by the Parties from time to time.  
E. “Commencement Date ” means the date on which a Certificate of Subscription 
commences, as indicated  in each Certificate of Subscription.  
F. “Country of Assignment ” means the country of permanent residence outside the Home 
Country as stated on the Certificate of Subscription.  
G. “Covered Personnel ” means partners, principals and directors (“PPMDs”, officers, 
employees of a Deloitte Firm as well as their spouses, life partners and dependent children. 
Persons over the age of sixty -five (65) and newborn children under forty -five (45) days old are 
ineligible to be Covered Personnel.  
H. “Data Feeds ” means  Global Distri bution System (“GDS”) Data Feed s which are Data 
feeds associated with the GDS  used by each of the Subscriber’s travel vendors, agencies or other 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC2 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc travel management service provider in each booking country and/or  Bulk Data File s (generally 
using .XML) and tr avel data from any of Subscriber’s travel providers including AMEX, BCD, 
HRG, CWT or Concur in a defined format relating to a particular booking country.  
I. “Deloitte Firm ” means any of the following: ( i) DGSL, ( ii) Deloitte Touche  Tohmatsu 
Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee (“DTTL”), ( iii) Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, a Swiss 
Verein, ( iv) any DTTL member firm, and ( v) any affiliated entity of any of the foregoing.  For the 
avoidance of doubt, DTTS is a Deloitte Firm.  
J. “Deloitte Technology ” means any system, software, hardware, or other material owned, 
operated, or used by any Deloitte Firm.  
K. “Disabling Device ” means any timer, clock, counter, time lock, time bomb, other 
limiting code, design, instruction, or routine which is desi gned or intended to do any of the 
following, either automatically or without the intentional action of Subscriber: (i) erase data or 
other programming; (ii) damage, disable, or otherwise alter the operation of the Service, any 
system, any software, or any component of the foregoing; or (iii) cause the Service, any system, 
any software, or any component of the foregoing to become incapable of being used in the full 
manner for which it was designed.  
L. “Documentation ” means , collectively: (i)  all user and admini strator manuals, operating 
instructions, installation guides, help files, standard documentation, and other printed, electronic, 
and online material that Vendor generally ma kes available to its customers with respect to the 
Service ; and (ii) all other prin ted, electronic, or online materials that Vendor provide s or makes 
available  to Subscriber  which  describe the features, functions, or operation of the Service .  
M. “Emergency Security Situation ” means civil and/or military unrest, insurrection, 
revolution, or other similar situation which in the opinion of Intl.SOS security personnel 
constitutes a breakdown of law and order that significantly impairs the physical safety of the 
Covered Individual . 
N. “Expatriate ” means a Covered Individual whom the Subscriber has declared to be on a 
work -related assignment on behalf of the Subscriber outside his or her Home Country for either 
periods equal to or in excess of ninety (90) consecutive days for a single trip or equal to or more 
than one hundred eighty (180) accumulated days for multiple trips during any twelve (12) month 
period.  
O. “Fees ” means all fees that are validly due and owing under this Agreement that are 
specified in any Certificate of Subscription  submitted by DGSL.  For avoidance of doubt, “Fees” 
shall include  “Subscription Fees”   
P. “Home Country ” means the Covered Individual’s country of citizenship.  
Q. “Intervention ” means an emergency assistance service carried out by Intl.SOS and all 
related ancillar y activities.  
R. “Online /Telephone  Service ” means any service that is accessible via the telephone and 
through the internet (including via mobile devices), including, mobile applications.  For example, 
Travel Tracker system, Country Risk Forecasts and Communi cations portal, ISOS mobile 
application.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC3 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc S. “Operations and Billings Procedure ” means a mutually agreed set of call handling, 
case management and billing instructions designed according to the requirements of the 
Subscriber.  
T. “Participating Firm ” means a Deloi tte Firm that signs a Participation Agreement.   
U. “Participation Agreement ” means a Participation Agreement substantially in the form 
attached hereto that is signed by a Deloitte Firm and lists this Agreement on its Schedule 
reflecting such Deloitte Firm’s p articipation in this Agreement, effective as provided in Section 
3B1 hereof.  Any Participation Agreement (and such information on its Schedule) shall be an 
integral part of this Agreement with respect to the Deloitte Firm signing such Participation 
Agreeme nt and Vendor.   
V. “Party ” means, as the context requires, Vendor, DGSL, or the applicable Participating 
Firm. “Parties” means, as the context requires, ( i) Vendor and DGSL, ( ii) Vendor and the 
applicable Participating Firm, or ( iii) Vendor, DGSL, and all Participating Firms . 
W. “Personal Information ” means any information relating to an identified or identifiable 
natural person that Vendor acquires from a  Deloitte Firm, or about a Covered Personnel  , or 
agents, in connection with the provision of Service unde r this Agreement, whether in written, 
oral, electronic, or other form, and any copies thereof. An identifiable person is a person who can 
be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one 
or more factor s specific to his or her physical, electronic, physiological, mental, economic, 
cultural or social identity. Examples of Personal Information include the following: account 
number (bank account, credit card, etc.) ; address ; biometric identifier ; license or  identification 
number ; date of birth ; government identifiers (such as social security numbers) ; name ; personnel 
number ; photograph or video identifiable to an individual ; vehicle identifier or serial number ; and 
may also include other information related to an individual that may directly or indirectly identify 
the individual (e.g. salary, performance rating, purchase history, call history, etc.).  
X. “Personnel ” of an entity means the partners, principals, and directors (“PPDs”), retired 
PPDs, officers, empl oyees and temporary employees of that entity as well as consultant s or 
independent contractor s who perform  work for  such entity, including any Subcontractor or 
Approved Subcontractor  such entity, including any Subcontractor or Approved Subcontractor  any 
Deloitte Firm; provided that, for purposes of this Agreement, Vendor and its Personnel shall not 
be considered Personnel of any Deloitte Firm.  
Y. “Pre-Existing Condition ” means any medical condition for which a Covered Personnel 
has received hospital care during the twelve (12) months immediately prior to the commencement 
of the Membership, or any medical  condition that has been diagnosed or treated by a health care 
provider, including the prescription of medication, within six (6) months prior to the 
comm encement of the Participation Agreement.  
Z. “Reimbursements ” if applicable, means any and all payments due to Vendor , any 
deposits payable by the Subscriber to Vendor  and any other payments, advances, cancellation 
fees or guarantees made by Vendor  on behalf o f the Subscriber or Covered Personnel ), with the 
exception of the Subscription Fee . 
AA. “Renewal Date” means the date on which the Term of a Certificate of Subscription is 
renewed for a subsequent Term as indicated in each Certificate of Subscription.  
BB. “Schedul e of Fees ” means the list of fees in Schedule B, Annex 1 .  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC4 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc CC. “Security Incident ” means any suspected or confirmed  misappropriation of, or 
unauthorized access to, or unauthorized or unlawful disclosure or use of, Subscriber Data or 
Personal Information.  
DD. “Serious Medical Condition ” means a condition which in the opinion of an Intl.SOS 
physician requires emergency medical treatment to avoid death or serious impairment to the 
Covered Personnel’s health. In determining whether a Serious Medical Condition exist s, the 
Intl.SOS physician may consider the Covered Individual’s geographic location, the nature of the 
medical emergency and the local availability of appropriate medical care or facilities.  
EE. “Service ” means the service s to be performed by Vendor pursuant t o this Agreement and 
the applicable Certificate of Subscription  as described in the attached Services Schedule . 
FF. “Subcontractor ” means any contractor engaged by Vendor  to perform the Services, or 
any part thereof, on behalf of Vendor , under the direct contr ol and supervision of Vendor  or in its 
own capacity as an affiliate of Vendor.  “Subcontractors” shall not include any independent third 
party medical, transportation or security service providers whom Vendor  may refer or 
recommend under the Agreement  for additional services ancillary or related to the Services . 
GG. “Subscriber” or “Client” means DGSL and each Participating Firm.  Any reference to 
“Subscriber ” or “Client ” in this Agreement  is to each Subscriber in its individual capacity.  
HH. “Subscriber Data ” means : (i) all data, content, information , and material (including all 
text, sound, and image files) that Subscriber or its Covered Personnel provide, transmit, create, 
store,  process, or derive  in the course of using the Service  (including (a) all Personal Inf ormation 
provided to Vendor through the use of single sign -on functionality (such as Microsoft Active 
Directory Federation Services or SAML 2.0) and (b) any access credentials (usernames and 
passwords) of Covered Individuals  that are stored with Vendor ); and (ii) all statistical, analytical, 
and usage data or information created or derived from Subscriber’s or its Covered Individuals’  
use of the Service.  Subscriber Data does not include the Service , the Documentation, or any 
Vendor software or  content provided by Vendor in connection with the Service .   
II. “Subscription Fee ” means the annual fee reflected on the Certificate of Subscription.  
JJ. “Support ” means Vendor’s support and maintenance program as further described 
herein.  Support is a Service hereunder.   
KK. “Term ” means the period stated in a Certificate of Subscription.  
LL. “"Traveler ” means Covered Personnel who is traveling outside his or her Home Country 
or his or her Country of Assignment for either less than (90) consecutive days for a single trip or 
less than one hundred eighty (180) accumulated days for multiple trips during any consecutive 
twelve (12) month period.  
MM. “Transaction Document ” means this Agreement, any Certificate of Subscription , any 
Participation Agreement and any related document.  
NN. “Vendor ” means International SOS Assistance Inc and its affiliates . 
OO. “Vendor’s Service Locations ” means the physical data centers from which Vendor (or 
an Approved Subcontractor) provides the Service to Subscriber .  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC5 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc PP. “Vendor’s Systems ” means the computers and computing environment from which 
Vendor (or an Approved Subcontractor) provides the Service, including all backup, redundant 
(whether virtual or physical), archival, testing, development, and non -production computers and 
computing environments.  
II. PURCHASING;  PRICING; AND INVOIC ES.  
A. Purchasing . Vendor shall promptly fulfil  all Certificate of Subscription s submitted by 
DGSL.  For all such purchases, DGSL shall receive, at a minimum, the pricing and discounts set 
forth in the Discount Schedule attached hereto.  Vendor shall not accept any Certificate of 
Subscription  or similar ordering document submitted in connection herewith by any entity other 
than DGSL (or its agent).  
B. Invoices . Vendor shall submit an invoice to DGSL in advance at the commencement of 
each year o f the Subscription Term specified in the applicable Certificate of Subscription ; 
provided that an invoice shall not be deemed to have been received unless and until ( i) this 
Agreement has been signed by Vendor and delivered to DGSL, ( ii) the Certificate of  Subscription  
related to such invoice has been signed by Vendor and delivered to DGSL, and ( iii) the invoice 
contains the information required by the applicable Certificate of Subscription . All undisputed 
invoices are payable within forty -five (45) days  from the date of receipt.  For the avoidance of 
doubt, Subscription Fees that are due during the Subscription Term (as stated in the Certificate of 
Subscription) shall be paid whether or not the Agreement or the Certificate of Subscription  is 
terminated. Subs cription Fees are not refundable in the event the Agreement or the Certificate of 
Subscription  is terminated. Vendor  shall have no obligation to render Services until the 
Subscription Fees and Reimbursements have been paid in full.   
C. In the event that Vendor  does not receive payment from the Subscriber for any 
undisputed Subscription Fee or Reimbursements when the same falls due in accordance with this 
Agreement and remains unpaid for thirty (30) days or more , and after thirty days’ written notice 
to Su bscriber, such Subscription Fee remains unpaid,  Vendor  shall (without prejudice to any 
other rights or remedies available to it) be entitled to:  
1. cease the provision of the Services to the Subscriber and the Covered Personnel 
(as defined under the Services Schedule -- Definitions) ; 
2. terminate this Agreement if the undisputed amount due and payable remains 
unpaid after Vendor has provided notice as set forth above.  
D. Taxes . With respect to all purchases under this Agreement , the relevant Subscriber shall 
be resp onsible for paying all applicable Transactional Taxes (as defined below)  (i) to Vendor 
upon receipt of a valid tax invoice  (if DGSL) , or (ii) to the relevant tax authority by means of 
self-assessment, as applicable , whether in or outside of the US . DGSL re presents that it is 
purchasing the Service for use by some or all of the Deloitte Firms globally.  DGSL will supply 
Vendor with a resale certificate, if applicable.  For purposes of this Agreement , “Transactional 
Taxes” means value added tax, goods and services tax, sales and use tax, or similar tax levied on 
business transactions in proportion to the value of the relevant turnover and in connection with 
the sale, purchase, receipt, consumption, or use of goods or services , but Transactional Taxes do 
not include taxes relating to Vendor’s income, net worth, or gross receipts.  
E. Affiliates . Vendor  may authori ze an affiliate of Vendor  to issue  invoices to the Subscriber 
and collect the amounts invoiced from the Subscriber on Vendor’s  behalf.  Vendor  shall not ify the 
Subscriber of the identity of the affiliate. Vendor  hereby represents  and warrants that the affiliate 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC6 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc identified by Vendor  shall have the authority  to collect such payments on behalf Vendor  to issue a 
valid receipt to the Subscriber , and that any p ayment by Subscriber to affiliate shall be deemed a 
payment to Vendor . 
III. SUBSCRIBER; PARTICIP ATING FIRMS.  
DGSL as Subscriber . As of the Effective Date , DGSL shall be a “Subscriber” hereunder.  
A. Participating Firms as Subscribers .  
1. DGSL  will provide the other D eloitte Firms with material information about this 
Agreement.  Any such Deloitte Firm may become a Subscriber hereunder as follows.  If 
any such Deloitte Firm that has signed a Participation Agreement has Vendor and this 
Agreement included in its Schedule, t hen, upon effectiveness of such Schedule pursuant 
to the terms of the Participation Agreement, such Vendor and such Deloitte Firm shall be 
bound by the terms of this Agreement and such Participation Agreement and, with 
respect to each other, have all the r ights and obligations of “Vendor” (in the case of 
Vendor) and “Subscriber”/“Participating Firm” (in the case of such Deloitte Firm) 
hereunder and thereunder , except that, notwithstanding any other term hereof, all Fees 
due under any Transaction Document shall be paid by DGSL and no other Deloitte Firm 
shall be liable to Vendor for such Fees.   
2. Any amendments or other changes to this Agree ment shall be applicable to Vendor, 
DGSL, and the Participating Firms as set forth herein and in the Participation 
Agree ments.  
3. Upon request, DGSL  shall provide Vendor with copies of signed Participation 
Agreements and a list of active Participating Firms  (including the current Territories for 
each Participating Firm) , as it may be updated from time to time.  
B. No Shared Liabil ity. With respect to this Agreement and any Service:  
1. Vendor  shall look solely to DGSL for violation of the terms of this Agreement by DGSL , 
and no other Deloitte Firm shall be liable with respect thereto, and  
2. Vendor  shall look solely to each Participatin g Firm for violation of the terms of this 
Agreement by such Participating Firm  and no other Deloitte Firm (including DGSL) shall 
be liable with respect thereto.  
C. Authorization to Provide Services.  
1. Any Covered Personnel and/or Authorized Person designated un der a Participation 
Agreement may contact an Intl.SOS Assistance Center to request  the Services. For 
Services which require prior approval by an Authorized Person Intl.SOS shall obtain such 
Authorization orally or in writing. When Services have been Author ized, the Subscriber 
shall not engage another service provider for the same incident so as not to cause 
confusion, delay or adversely affect the Covered Personnel’s well -being.  
2. Each Subscriber shall name at least three (3) persons to be the Authorized Persons for 
purposes of notification, verification and authorization in relation to the Services. The 
Subscriber shall notify Intl.SOS in writing of the full names and title, contac t numbers 
(including mobile numbers) email and fax numbers of the Authorized Persons. The 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC7 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc authority of these persons to act as Authorized Persons shall not be effective until written 
notification is received by Intl.SOS. the Subscriber shall notify Intl.SO S of any changes 
to the Authorized Persons and/or their contact information. In the event the Subscriber 
has not provided Intl.SOS with details of its Authorized Persons, the signatory on behalf 
of the Subscriber to the Participation Agreement will be deem ed to be the Authorized 
Person.  
3. In the course of providing the Services set out in the Services Schedule Intl.SOS will 
provide the Authorized Person with information, evaluations and recommendations 
regarding a Covered Personnel’s medical, travel and secu rity status and the costs of 
providing the services requested. In the event Intl.SOS is unable to reach an Authorized 
Person after making a reasonable effort to do so, Intl.SOS may arrange for such Services 
as it deems necessary for the Covered Personnel’s  well-being.  
IV. LICENSE AND INTELLEC TUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS .  
A. Vendor hereby grants to subscriber, for use by it and its  covered individuals, a non -
exclusive, non -transferable , worldwide, royalty free, revocable license to use the service for the 
subscription ter m specified in the applicable certificate of subscription .  
B. Vendor hereby grants to subscriber, for use by it and its covered individuals  (including on 
home office systems and mobile devices), a non -exclusive, non -transferable, worldwide, royalty 
free, rev ocable license to use any software (including mobile applications) that is provided by 
vendor in order to access the service for the subscription term specified in the applicable 
certificate of subscription  
C. Vendor hereby grants to subscriber, for use by it  and its covered individuals  (including on 
home office systems and mobile devices), a revocable, non -exclusive, non -transferable, fully -
paid, royalty free, worldwide right and license to access, review, download, print, use, store, 
reproduce  the documentat ion and any content provided by vendor that is not subscriber data in 
connection with the service . 
D. Vendor acknowledges that, as between vendor and subscriber, subscriber owns all right, 
title, and interest in and to all of its subscriber data and it is the  sole property of that subscriber.    
E. Subscriber acknowledges that, except for the limited rights granted above, as between 
vendor and subscriber, vendor owns all right, title and interest in and to the service and 
documentation . 
V. SERVICES; SERVICE LEVELS AN D SUPPORT.  
A. The Services Schedule  attached to this Agreement and incorporated by reference list 
some of the Services that DGSL may purchase from Vendor.  
B. Vendor shall provide all Online /Telephone  Services  in accordance with the Service 
Levels and Support Sc hedule attached hereto.  
VI. REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES.   
Vendor hereby represents, warrants, and agrees that:  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC8 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc A. Vendor has the full power and authority to (i) enter into this Agreement, ( ii) grant the 
rights granted in this Agreement , and ( iii) provide the Service.   Vendor  is not restricted in any 
way, by agreement or otherwise, from any of the foregoing.   
B. The Service (i) is either proprietary to Vendor or properly licensed by Vendor from third 
party providers, (ii) does  not infringe, misappropriate, or violate any patent, copyright, trademark, 
trade secret, contract, or other proprietary right, and (iii) is  free of liens, encumbrances , and other 
claims.   
C. Vendor and its Personnel shall  not breach any agreement or other ob ligation to keep in 
confidence, or to refrain from using, the personal, confidential, proprietary , or trade secret 
information of any person or entity, and shall  not use any such information, in connection with 
the Service.  
D. Either there is no Alternative L icense Agreement of Vendor or any third party included or 
referenced in the Service or, if there is such an Alternative License Agreement, it is and shall be 
superseded in its entirety by this Agreement, and shall be of no force and effect, regardless of 
whether such Alternative License Agreement is “signed” or otherwise agreed to by any Personnel 
on behalf of any Deloitte Firm.  
E. The Service complies with, and Vendor shall, at its own expense, comply with and 
assume all liabilities or obligations imposed by , all applicable laws, rules, and regulations  of 
governing  judicial or governmental  authorities .  
F. The Service is performed in accordance with those standards of care, skill and diligence, 
and according to practices and procedures, customarily followed by a highly trained professional 
in the performance of the same or similar services.  
G. Vendor  shall exercise due care , skill and diligence in the referral of Covered Personnel  by 
Intl.SOS  such independent third party providers  of medical, transportation or security services . 
H. The Service conform s to, and performs, functions, and produces results  in accordance  
with,  the Documentation , the applicable Certificate of Subscription , and any Subscriber 
specifications agreed to by Vendo r in writing .  Vendor has provided or made available to 
Subscriber all relevant Documentation for the Service.  The Documentation is complete and 
accurate, and the Service does not contain any material undocumented feature.   
I. The Service  is, and all website s, web pages, and software provided as part of the Service  
are, browser -neutral and develop ed and supplied in such a manner that they can be accessed, 
viewed, used, and have their content displayed in materially the same way regardless of  the type 
of brows er being used, including Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Safari, Chrome, and Opera.  
J. DGSL hereby represents and warrants that DGSL has duly authorized DTTS as agent to 
sign this Agreement on DGSL’s behalf.   
K. Except as expressly provided in this Agreement  or a Certificate of Subscription , each 
Party disclaims all other representations and warranties, whether express, implied, statutory or 
otherwise, including warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC9 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc VII. INDEMNIFICATION.  
A. Vendor shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless DGSL, each Subscriber, and each of 
the other Deloitte Firms, each of the foregoing’s Covered Personnel (each an “Indemnitee”), from 
all losses, damages, judgments, liabilities, costs and expenses (including  reasonable attorneys ’ 
fees), arising from  infringement, misappropriation, or violation of  any patent, copyright, 
trademark, trade secret, contract, or other proprietary right (collectively, a “Claim”)  with respect 
to any Service, or the use thereof pursu ant to this Agreement and/or any Transaction Document, 
provided that (i) Vendor receives prompt  notice of such Claim (provided further, that failure to 
receive such prompt  notice shall not diminish Vendor’s obligation hereunder unless, and only to 
the exte nt that, such failure prejudices Vendor’s ability to defend against such Claim), and (ii) the 
Indemnitee allows Vendor to control the defense and settlement of such Claim (provided further, 
that (a) Indemnitee may monitor but not control the defense and se ttlement of such Claim with 
counsel of its own choosing and  at its own expense, and Vendor shall cooperate in the same, and 
(b) Vendor shall not propose a judgment or agree to a settlement that attributes fault or liability to 
an Indemnitee without the pri or written consent of DGSL) .  
B. In addition to the obligations set forth above, if any Service becomes subject to a Claim 
or its use is enjoined, Vendor will promptly (i ) procure for each Subscriber the right to continue 
to use such Service, (ii) replace or modify such Service in a manner that retains its functionality 
and quality so that it is no longer infringing, misappropriating or violating such right, or (iii) 
requi re each Subscriber, upon advance written notice, to stop using such Service and return to 
DGSL all unused or unfulfilled portions of the Fees paid by DGSL for such Service.   
C. Each  Party (an “Indemnifying Party”) shall indemnify and hold harmless the other P arty 
(an “Indemnified Party”) for all  losses, damages, judgments, liabilities, costs and expenses 
(including reasonable attorneys ’ fees) related to  (i) bodily injury or death or (ii) damage to 
tangible property, in each case for which the Indemnifying Party  or its Personnel was the  cause, 
except to the extent attributable to the fault or negligence of the Indemnified Party  claiming 
indemnification hereunder.   
D. Notwithstanding the above, if (i) the Indemnifying Party  is unable to take the appropriate 
action necessary to defend or settle any Claim, including because the Indemnifying Party  is 
insolvent or in bankruptcy, or (ii) the Indemnifying Party  breaches or intends to breach this term 
by not defending or settling any Claim, then in each case the Indemn ified Party  may take sole 
control of the defense or settlement of such Claim, and the Indemnifying Party  shall be liable to 
the Indemnified Party  for all of the Indemnified Party ’s costs and expenses related to the same, 
including attorneys ’ fees and costs  and expenses of settlement or judgment.  
E. Subscriber warrants to Vendor that Subscriber has the full legal right to grant to Vendor 
the right to use, communicate and transfer the Subscriber Data in connection Travel Tracker and 
that Vendor’s use of Subscrib er Data as authorized by this Agreement and/or any Transaction 
Document does not violate any law, rule, regulation, or directive of any jurisdiction.  
F. Subscriber shall not include on the websites described in this Agreement  and/or any 
Transaction Document , or otherwise provide, transmit or make available under the Subscriber’s 
Services  any unlawful, harassing, libellous, abusive, threatening, harmful, vulgar, obscene or 
otherwise objectionable material of any kind. Subscriber will only use the Services  for lawful 
purposes, in compliance with all applicable laws including, without limitation, copyright, 
trademark, obscenity and defamation laws.  Vendor  reserves the right in its sole discretion, but 
will not be obligated, to remove data provided under the Agree ment and/or Transaction 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC10 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc Document .  Vendor  will cooperate with government authorities and reserves the right to report 
breaches or suspected breaches of the law or intellectual property rights to such authorities.  
G. Except as expressly provided in this Agreement, each Party disclaims all other 
indemnities, whether express, implied, statutory or otherwise.  
VIII.  LIMITATIONS OF LIABI LITY.  
A. Except as set forth in the following sentence, under no circumstances shall any Party be 
liable to any other Party for any (i) indirect, special, consequential, incidental, punitive or 
exemplary damages, costs, expenses or losses or (ii) loss of business or lost profits (regardless of 
whether either is deemed to be “general,” “direct,” “indirect,” “special,” “consequen tial,”  
“incidental,” “punitive,” “exemplary,” or any other category of damages), that, in each case, arise 
in any way out of this Agreement, any other Transaction Document, or otherwise relate to the 
subject matter hereof or thereof . The preceding sentenc e shall not limit any obligation or liability 
under Section 7 (Indemnification), Section IX (Confidentiality), or Section X (Data Security ; 
Privacy ), which shall be limited to five (5)  times the Fees paid or payable by DGSL during a 
twelve month  period of the Term .   For the avoidance of doubt  this section shall not apply to for 
damages arising from gross negligence, wilful  misconduct, or damages that cannot be limited by 
law.  
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement or any other Transaction 
Document, under no circumstances shall any Deloitte Firm (including DGSL) be liable for the 
actions or inactions of any other Deloitte Firm, or any Covered Personnel of any other Deloitte 
Firm, with respect to this Agreement, any other Transaction Document , or the subject matter 
hereof or thereof, except that (i) DGSL shall be liable for its own actions and those of DGSL 
Covered Personnel, and (ii) each Participating Firm shall be liable for its own actions and those of 
its affiliated entities in its Territo ry, and its and their Covered Personnel, all as set forth in its 
Participation Agreement . Nothing in this Section VIIB shall affect any separate arrangement that 
may exist between or among any Deloitte Firms regarding indemnification, allocation of 
liabilities , or otherwise.   For clarification, the foregoing sentence relates solely to rights and 
obligations among the Deloitte Firms and shall not in any way expand any right or remedy that 
Vendor has under this Agreement.  
C. Notwithstanding anything conta ined in this Agreement  or any other Transaction 
Document,  under no circumstances shall any Personnel of any Deloitte Firm have any personal 
liability to Vendor  for any fee or other obligation under this Agreement, any other Transaction 
Document, or the sub ject matter hereof or thereof.  
D. The information and advice provided by Intl.SOS as further described in the Services 
Schedule and all referrals are not intended to constitute diagnoses or treatment or to be relied 
upon as a substitute for clinical advice or  management by a treating physician.  
E. To the extent permitted by applicable law, the Subscriber waives all claims against 
Intl.SOS for any loss to the extent arising from any advice given, services provided, acts or 
omissions of any third party provider of  medical, transportation or security services  referred to an 
Covered Personnel  by Intl.SOS. For the avoidance of doubt, the Subscriber shall be solely 
responsible for deciding whether an Employee returns to  the workplace . 
F. Intl.SOS shall employ reasonable e fforts to render the Services hereunder on a worldwide 
basis.  However, the Parties acknowledge that Intl.SOS’ ability to deliver any Service is 
dependent upon and subject to: local and/or international resource availability; national and 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC11 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc international law  and regulations; and acquisition of any necessary authori zations issued by the 
various authorities concerned; all of which are outside of the control of Intl.SOS.  
G. Intl.SOS shall be under no obligation to provide the Services to Covered Personnel  who, 
in the reasonable opinion of Intl.SOS, are located in areas that represent conditions in which 
providing the Services is impossible or unsafe, including without limitation: geographical 
remoteness; war (whether declared or undeclared); civil or other hostiliti es; or political unrest.  
H. The terms of this Section shall apply to the fullest extent of the law  and regardless of 
whether the damage, cost, expense or loss is based  in contract, statute, tort (including negligence) 
or otherwise.  
IX. CONFIDENTIALITY   
A. “Discloser ” as used herein shall be the Party that discloses or causes the disclosure of the 
Confidential Information at issue or to which such Confidential Information belongs or is 
otherwise confidential.  Without limiting the foregoing, Subscriber shall be considered the 
Discloser of Confidential Information regardless of whether Vendor receives such information 
from Subscriber or another Deloitte Firm.   
B. “Recipient ” as used herein shall be the Party that receives Discloser’s Confidential 
Information.  
C. “Confidential Information ” as used herein shall mean all documents, materials, 
information and ideas of or about (i) any Deloitte Firm or any of its past, current or prospective 
clients or suppliers  (in which case Subscriber would be Discloser) or (ii) Vendor (in which case 
Vendor would be Discloser), in each case that are not generally known to the public , including 
documents, materials, information and ideas relating to business plans, strategies, programs, 
operations, methodologies, pricing, policies, practi ces, procedures, products, services, equipment, 
systems, facilities, human resources, benefits, and Personnel, whether in written, oral, electronic 
or any other form.   
D. Notwithstanding the above, “ Confidential Information ” shall not include information 
that (i) is or becomes publicly available, other than as a result of disclosure by Recipient in breach 
of this Agreement, (ii) was known by Recipient prior to receipt of such information from 
Discloser, or (iii) is developed by Recipient independently of any information received from 
Discloser.   The Service does not constitute Vendor’s Confidential Information , but is subject to 
the usage restrictions set forth in this Agreement .  
E. Recipient shall:  
Maintain the confidentiality of the Confidential Information u sing at least the same degree of care 
as it employs in maintaining its own trade secret, proprietary and/or confidential information, but 
in no event using less than a reasonable degree of care.  
Limit its use of the Confidential Information solely for pur poses of exercising its rights and/or 
fulfilling its obligations under this Agreement.   
Limit access to the Confidential Information solely to those Personnel of Recipient (which, where 
Subscriber is the Recipient,  for purposes of this clause of Section IX E only, shall include 
Personnel of Subscriber and the other Deloitte Firms) who are obligated to maintain the 
confidentiality of such information.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC12 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc Not disclose the Confidential Information to any third parties except to its own legal and business 
advisor s who have a need to know such information and who are obligated to maintain the 
confidentiality of such information, or as otherwise allowed herein.  
F. Notwithstanding the above, it shall not be a breach of this Agreement for Recipient to 
disclose Discloser’ s Confidential Information (i) pursuant to the prior written consent of 
Discloser (including as may be permitted herein or in any Certificate of Subscription ); (ii) as 
requested or required by interrogatories, requests for information from a governmental, regulatory 
or supervisory authority, subpoena or similar legal process, or in accordance with professional 
standards, or in connection with litigation pertaining hereto, provided  that, where reasonably 
feasible, Recipient shall provide Discloser with notice prior to such disclosure and reasonable 
assistance in obtaining, through court order, administrative ruling, or otherwise, a limitation or 
other protection of the Confidential Information that is subject to such disclosure; or (iii) that was 
disclosed to Recipient on a non -confidential basis from a source other than Discloser (including, 
where Subscriber is the Discloser, from a source other than Subscriber or another Deloitte F irm) 
where Recipient reasonably believes that (a) the source is not prohibited from making such 
disclosure and (b) the information is not otherwise confidential to Discloser, provided  that upon 
discovery of the confidential nature of the information, Recip ient immediately takes action to 
treat such information as Discloser’s Confidential Information hereunder.   
G. Vendor will not, in the course of performance of this Agreement or thereafter, use the 
name “Deloitte”, “Touche ”, or “Tohmatsu”, or any combination thereof, or any related name, 
mark or logo, in any press release, advertisement, or other promotional or marketing material or 
media, whether in written, oral, electronic, visual, or any other form, without, in each cas e, prior 
written consent.   Such consent shall only be requested by sending an email, attention Head of 
Procurement, to: globalprocurement@deloitte.com .   
H. Each of Subscriber and Vendor recognizes and ack nowledges that the Confidential 
Information is of a special, unique and extraordinary character, disclosure of which cannot be 
wholly compensated by monetary damages, and that any disclosure or unauthorized use of the 
Confidential Information, or other bre ach of this Section IX by them or their Personnel 
(including breach of Section IXG above) shall cause the other Party irreparable injury.  Each of 
Subscriber and Vendor, therefore, expressly agrees that, in addition to any rights and remedies 
which such ot her Party may have under this Agreement or at law or in equity, such other Party 
shall be entitled, without the posting of any bond or security, to injunctive and/or other equitable 
relief to prevent the breach of this Section IX, and/or to otherwise secur e the enforcement of any 
of its terms.  
X. DATA SECURITY ; PRIVACY .    
A. Data Security.   Vendor represents, warrants, and agrees that  the Service incorporate s and 
uses, and Vendor shall incorporate and use,  commercially reasonable security measures  as 
follows:  
1. Vendor shall i mplement , maintain , and enforce  appropriate  administrative, 
technical, and physical saf eguards to ( i) ensure the security and confidentiality of 
Subscriber Data and Personal Information , (ii) protect against anticipated threats or 
hazards to the security or integrity of Subscriber Data and Personal Information , and ( iii) 
protect Subscriber Data and Personal Information  from loss, misuse, and unauthorized 
access, discloser, alteration, and des truction, taking into due account the risks involved in 
the processing and the nature of Subscriber Data and the Personal Information . These 
safeguards  will (a) be no less rigorous than industry accepted standard s and (b) include a 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC13 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc written information secu rity plan, information access controls, systems protections (e.g., 
intrusion protection), physical security measures, data encryption, and employee training.   
2. Vendor shall (i) maintain  industry standard (or better) back -up, redundancy, 
disaster recovery , and business continuity  measures  and procedures to support the 
continued operation of the Service (“ DR Processes ”), and (ii) implement and carry out its 
DR Processes  as necessary .  Vendor shall (a) annually assess, test, and update its DR 
Processes and (b) appropriately train its Personnel in the DR Processes, which will 
include testing and retraining. As part of its DR Processes, Vendor shall maintain back -
up copies of Subscriber Data at the primary data center and a geographically separate 
data center and restore Subscriber Data following a Service outage with a recovery point 
objective of four hours. All obligations in Section X apply to Vendor’s redundancy and 
disaster recovery sites and facilities.  
3. Vendor shall: (i) continuously monitor the Service, Vendor’s Systems, and 
Vendor’s Service Locations for a Security Incident; (ii) n otify DGSL immediately  (but no 
later than 72 hours)  upon confirmation  of a Security Incident; (iii) p romptly investigate 
each Security Incident; and (iv) promptly take all commercially reasonable steps 
(including any steps reasonably requested by Subscriber) to limit, stop, or otherwise 
remedy, and prevent the recurrence of, each Security Incident. Vendor  shall assist 
Subscriber in connection with any investigation that Subscriber conducts with respect to a 
Security Incident, including facilitating interviews with Vendor’s Personnel  involved 
with the Security Incident, making available to Subscriber all re levant information, 
records, logs, files, data reporting, and other materials about the Security Incident 
(including the circumstances, extent, and causes of the Security Incident), and providing 
Subscriber with physical access to the facilities and operat ions affected by the Security 
Incident.   Except to the extent required by applicable law, Vendor shall not undertake any 
communications, notifications, or correspondence related to any such Security Incident 
with any regulator, third party, or data subject , in each case, without prior written consent 
of, and coordination with, Subscriber.   
4. The Service is compatible with Microsoft Active Directory Federation Services 
or SAML 2.0 , such that: (i)  the Service  provide s authentication and single sign -on 
between Subscriber’s network and the Service ; (ii) Permitted Users can access and use 
the Service directly from Subscriber’s networks by virtue of having “signed on” to 
Subscriber’s networks and without the need to independently “sign on” to access and use 
the Ser vice; (iii) Subscriber controls provisioning and de -provisioning of accounts and 
determines the strength of passwords ; and (i v) Vendor does not store any usernames or 
passwords.  
5. The Service (including any software or media provided by Vendor which is  used 
to provide or access the Service) does not contain any virus , Trojan horse, worm, 
backdoor, trapdoor, malware,  or Disabling Device.  
6. Vendor shall  use industry -standard and up -to-date security tools, technologies , 
and procedures  in providing the Service , including appropriate firewall protection, anti-
virus and anti -malware protections , and intrusion prevention, detection , and reporting 
tools . Vendor shall monitor (i) its security tools, technologies, and procedures to confirm 
that they are installed, fun ctioning, updated, and active  and (ii)  all software that Vendor 
uses to provide the Service  for vulnerabilities.  If one or more  vulnerabilities to software 
that Vendor uses to provide the Service are revealed , Vendor  shall promptly  remediate 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC14 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc each such vuln erability by apply ing, as applicable,  a security patch, hot fix , or service 
pack  no later than 14 days after the patch, hot fix, or security pack is  tested and 
determined safe for installation and use . Vendor shall promptly assess and test (if 
applicable) each hotfix, security patch, and service pack to determine it is safe for 
installation. Vendor shall apply a ll other patches  (i.e., those not arising out of a security 
vulnerability)  no later than 45 days after the date the patch is  determined safe .   
7. The website link that allows Subscriber and its Covered Individuals to access and 
use the Service  uses industry standard security and encryption methods . All Subscriber 
Data and Personal Information while  in transit  is secure and encrypted using at least 256 
bit TLS encryption , including when Subscriber Data and Personal Information is 
transmitted between networks (including email), whether public or private . All 
Subscriber Data and  Personal Information stored on Vendor’s System s is secure and  
encrypted using a t least 256 bit AES (or equivalent)  encryption.   
8. Vendor shall not store any  Subscriber Data  or Personal Information on any 
mobile computing or storage device , such as a  laptop computer, PDA, tablet, smart 
phone, jump drive, backup media, CD, or DVD, unles s (i) that data is encrypted using at 
least 256 -bit AES (or equivalent) encryption ; (ii) a complex  password is required to gain 
access to the data ; and (iii) Vendor shall  ensure  its Personnel do not share with any 
unauthorized user any password or PIN requ ired to access the data stored on that device .  
Vendor shall securely erase  all Subscriber Data  and Personal Information stored on any 
mobile device before  that device is dispos ed of , reuse d, resold , or return ed to a vendor at 
end of a lease.   If any Subsc riber Data and Personal Information is stored on a laptop, 
Vendor shall ensure that: (i) anti -virus and anti -spyware software is installed on the 
laptop and updated in a timely manner (but no less than weekly); (iii) the laptop is 
physically secured when l eft unattended; (iv) the laptop requires the screensaver to 
activate after no more than 10 minutes of inactivity and requires entry of the user’s 
password to access data stored on it; (v) the laptop requires a log-in password that is 
complex, at least 7 ch aracters in length, which must be changed at least every 90 days 
and cannot be reused for at least 10 iterations; and (vi) the laptop locks out after not more 
than 5 invalid log -in attempts at entering the log -in password. If any Subscriber Data and 
Person al Information is stored on a smartphone or PDA, Vendor shall ensure that: (a) the 
device requires a password or PIN to gain access to the data stored on it; (b) the device 
will erase all data stored on it after no more than 8 invalid log -in attempts; and (c) the 
device locks after a period of inactivity of no more than 20 minutes, requiring that the 
log-in password or PIN be entered to access the data on it. If any Personal Information is 
stored on portable media (e.g., CDs, DVDs, and USB drives), Vendor s hall ensure that 
the portable media requires a complex password or PIN to gain access to data stored on 
it. 
9. Vendor has : (i) performed a vulnerability scan during the three -month period  
preceding  the Effective Date and an external penetration test during the twelve -month  
period  preceding  the Effective Date ; and (ii) appropriately remediated any security issue 
identified by that vulnerability scan and penetration test.  Vendor shall conduct (or have 
conducted) vulnerability scan s of the Service, Vendor’s Sy stems, and Vendor’s Service 
Locations.  Such vulnerability scans must  (a) be performed by a third party scanner  that is 
nationally or internationally recognized as a provider of data security vulnerability 
scanning services , (b) include quarterly  authentic ated network layer vulnerability 
assessments of both the internal and external internet protocol range , and (c) include both 
static and authenticated dynamic analysis of the software code underlying the Service 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC15 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc before each major upgrade  to the Service .  Vendor shall conduct penetration test s of the 
Service, Vendor’s Systems and Vendor’s Service Locations.  Such penetration test must 
(1) be performed at least once per calendar year by appropriately qualified Vendor 
Personnel, (2) encompass both the internal and external network and authenticated 
application layer, and (3) include at least 80 hours of manual effort.  In  addition to the 
timeframes stated above, Vendor shall conduct (or have conducted) a vulnerability scan 
and penetration test as described in th e prior sentences promptly  after any Security 
Incident.  Vendor shall promptly  remediate each security issue identified by a ny 
vulnerability scan or penetration test  at Vendor’s expense .  Upon Subscriber’s request, 
Vendor shall  provide copies of all report s generated from any such vulnerability scan or 
penetration test .   
10. Vendor shall promptly correct any OWASP Top 10 security vulnerabilit y 
identified in the Service .  If Vendor does not correct an OWASP Top 10 security 
vulnerability no later than 60 days after learning of a vulnerability, DGSL may terminate 
any affected Service  under  Section XIV B5.  
11. Vendor shall conduct a background check on each of its Personnel that (i)  have 
access to, or may process any, Subscriber Data, Personal Information, or Deloit te 
Technology or (ii)  come on site to locations operated by or used on behalf of any Deloitte 
Firm . Vendor shall conduct the background checks at its sole expense  and in accordance 
with all applicable laws and regulations  and complete them before its Perso nnel have 
access to Subscriber Data, Personal Information, Deloitte Technology, or Deloitte 
locations. Each background check will include at least the following: (a) employment 
history verification ; (b) educa tion verification ; (c) verification of any licen ses or 
credentials ; (d) a criminal records check ; and (e) social security number (or similar 
government issued identifier) verification . If the findings of any background check for, or 
any subsequent information learned by Vendor about, one of its Personne l causes 
Vendor, or would cause a reasonable person, to be concerned about the character or 
fitness of such Personnel for placement with, or access to data of a firm engaged in , tax, 
audit, consulting, or professional services, Vendor shall not allow such Personnel to 
access, or have potential access, to Subscriber Data, Personal Information, or Deloitte 
Technology. Upon reasonable notice, DGSL or a third party chosen by DGSL and  
acceptable to Vendor (such acceptance not to be unreasonably withheld, delayed, or 
conditioned) may audit the background checks for purposes of verifying Vendor’s 
compliance  with this Section XA12. 
12. All written information  regarding Vendor’s security pract ices, procedures, and 
protocols furnished to Subscriber  by or on behalf of Vendor, and all the information 
regarding Vendor’s security practices, procedures, and protocols made a part of this 
Agreement, is true, accurate, and complete, and contains no untr ue statement of a 
material fact or omits any material fact necessary to make such information not 
misleading.   
13. If Vendor is granted access to any Deloitte Technology  in connection with the 
Service, Vendor shall (i) comply with any policies or instructions of the applicable 
Deloitte Firm regarding such Deloitte Technology, (ii) use such Deloitte Technology only 
in connection with the Service, (iii) not permit any other individual to access such 
Deloitte Technology, (iv) upon Subscriber’s request, cease acces s to and use of such 
Deloitte Technology and return all Deloitte Technology to Subscriber, and (v) not 
deactivate , disable , or introduce any Disabling Device, viruses, Trojan horse, worm , 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC16 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc backdoor, trapdoor, malware , or other similar code t o such Deloitte Technology , or 
otherwise take action that would cause any damage or harm to any Deloitte Technology.  
Vendor’s Personnel who are on site at locations operated by or used on behalf of any 
Deloitte Firm will observe any working rules or schedules of such Delo itte Firm that they 
are notified of . 
B. Use and Disclosure of Subscriber Data ; Privacy Protections . In addition to complying 
with its other obligations and requirements under this Agreement , Vendor represents, warrants, 
and agrees that :  
1. Unless legally prohibited from doing so,  if Vendor receives  a Discovery Request  
(as defined below) , Vendor shall notify such Subscriber  immediately of that Discovery 
Request and provide such Subscriber with all documentation related to the Discovery 
Request (and, if DGSL  is not the Subscriber, Vendor shall provide such notice and 
documentation to DGSL at the same time it provides it to Subscriber), including the 
Subscriber Data or  Personal Information that Vendor is contemplating disclosing . Vendor  
will not be in violatio n of its obligations under  Section XB1 when  Personal Information  
or Subscriber Data is disclosed by Vendor to the extent legally required by a valid order 
of a court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, or a validly enforceable 
subpoena; provided  that (i) Vendor provides prompt written notice to Subscriber (and, if 
DGSL is not the Subscriber, Vendor shall provide such notice and documentation to 
DGSL at the same time it provides it to Subscriber) of any such request or requirement 
with rea sonably sufficient details regarding the request or requirement and the Personal 
Information or Subscriber Data that Vendor is contemplating disclosing so that DGSL 
and/or another Deloitte Firm may seek a protective order or other appropriate remedy , (ii) 
Vendor reasonably cooperates with DGSL or any other Deloitte Firm in their efforts to 
seek such order or remedy , and (iii) Vendor takes all reasonable steps to preserve the 
confidentiality and privileged nature of the Subscriber Data or Personal Informatio n, 
including requesting that the Subscriber Data or Personal Information not be disclosed to 
non-parties or the public . If DGSL or another Deloitte Firm does not obtain a protective 
order or other appropriate remedy, Vendor shall furnish only that portion of the 
Subscriber Data or Personal Information that is, on the advice of Vendor’s counsel, 
legally required to be disclosed and, upon DGSL’s or another Deloitte Firm’s request, use 
best efforts to obtain assurances that the disclosed Subscriber Data or Per sonal 
Information is given confidential treatment.  For purposes of this Agreement, a 
“Discovery Request ” means a subpoena, document request, investigatory demand or 
other judicial, regulatory, or governmental process seeking disclosure of information 
abou t or related to Personal Information or Subscriber Data.  
2. Vendor shall Process and use Subscriber Data and  Personal Information solely 
and exclusively  for the specific purpose s for which that Subscriber Data or Personal 
Information  is provided to Vendor under the terms of this Agreement, or in compliance 
with the Subscriber’s written instructions . Vendor shall inform Subscriber if (in Vendor’s 
opinion) Subscriber’s instructions (including specific purposes for which it was provided 
to Vendor under the terms of this Agreement) would be in breach of: (i) the GDPR; or (ii) 
other applicable privacy laws. If Vendor cannot Process Personal Information in 
compliance with the foregoing, Vendor shall promptly inform Subscriber of its inability 
to comply and shall ceas e Processing Personal Information until it can remediate such 
noncompliance. If Vendor is required by applicable law, regulation, professional rules, or 
professional standards to Process the Personal Information other than as instructed by 
Subscriber, Vend or shall disclose that requirement to Subscriber before Processing, 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC17 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc unless that requirement prohibits such disclosure on grounds of public interest.  Vendor 
shall reproduce Subscriber Data and Personal Information only to the extent necessary for 
these pur poses . Without limiting the foregoing, Vendor  shall not engage in “data mining” 
of Subscriber Data or Personal Information (whether through automated or human 
means) or use Subscriber Data or Personal Information for any advertising or other 
commercial pur poses that benefit s Vendor or a third party .   
3. Vendor shall comply  with all data protection and privacy laws applicable to 
Vendor with respect to Subscriber Data and  Personal Information , including GDPR .  As 
of the Effective Date, Vendor has no reason to b elieve that there exist s any applicable law 
that would have a substantial adverse effect on the assurances provided for under Section 
10B.  Vendor shall  inform DGSL if it becomes aware of any such laws, and upon receipt 
of that notice, DGSL or an affected  Participating Firm may suspend transfer of data 
and/or DGSL may terminate this Agreement  under  Section XIVB5.  Vendor shall provide 
reasonable assistance to Subscriber with any data protection impact assessments, and 
prior consultations with competent data  privacy authorities, which Subscriber reasonably 
considers to be required by Article 35 or 36 of the GDPR or equivalent provisions of any 
other applicable law, in each case solely in relation to Processing of Personal Information 
by, and taking into accou nt the nature of the Processing and information available to, 
Vendor.  “ GDPR ” means the EU General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679.  
“Process/Processing/Processed ” means any operation or set of operations which is 
performed upon Personal Information, w hether or not by automatic means, such as 
collection, recording, organization, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, 
consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making 
available, alignment or combination, restriction, or erasure or destruction  
4. Without limiting the foregoing, if any Personal Information relates to a resident 
of Massachusetts and constitutes “Personal Information” as defined in 201 CMR 17.02 
(as may be amended), Vendor shall comply with the o bligations of 201 CMR 17.00 et. 
seq. (as may be amended), entitled “Standards for the Protection of Personal Information 
of Residents of the Commonwealth”, with respect to such Personal Information.   
5. Upon (1) termination of this Agreement or any Certifica te of Subscription  for any 
reason, (2) the non-renewal of  a Service, or (3) the written request of DGSL , all 
Subscriber Data and Personal Information in Vendor’s possession or under its control 
shall be  promptly , at DGSL’s option either  (i) deleted or destroyed in a manner that 
prevents its recovery or restoration  (with Vendor certifying to DGSL that such deletion or 
destruction has occurred)  or (ii) transferred and returned to DGSL  (or its designee)  in a 
secure manner without Vendor retaining any  actual or  recoverable copies thereof.   
6. Vendor shall inform  DGSL immediately of any request, complaint , or inquir y 
that Vendor receive s with respect to Personal Information (each, a “ PI Request ”) without 
responding to that PI Request (unless otherwise authorized by DGSL in writing ) and 
cooperate fully and in a timely manner with DGSL with regard to a PI Request .  
7. Vendor shall cooperate with, and take such action as reasonably required by 
Subscriber, including the execution of an additional data protection agreement that is 
legally adequate, to enable it or any other Deloitte Firm to comply with its obligations 
under applicable data protection and privacy laws as they relate to Personal Information. 
Without limiting the foregoing, Vendor and Subscriber agree that the Standard 
Contractual Clauses for Data Processors as attached to this Agreement (the “ Standard 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC18 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc Contractual Clauses ”) shall apply to the transfer of Personal Information to Vendor from 
any data exporter (as defined in the Standard Contractual Clauses).  Vend or shall execute 
the Standard Contractual Clauses with any Deloitte Firm that wishes to do so.  If the 
Standard Contractual Clauses are amended, updated, or replaced, upon request of any 
Deloitte Firm Vendor shall promptly execute the amended, updated, or replacement 
version as provided to the Vendor by any Deloitte Firm.   The execution of any such new 
versions of the Standard Contractual Clauses or any additional data protection agreement 
will not constitute a new Service.  Vendor shall also require that any Approved 
Subcontractors comply with the applicable terms of this Section X, the Standard 
Contractual Clauses and the applicable terms of any additional data protection agreement, 
or otherwise utilize and comply with the requirements of an alternative l egal mechanism 
that is legally adequate to legitimize the processing of such Personal Information (such as 
binding corporate rules).  
8. If Vendor determines that it can no longer meet one or more obligations under 
this Section X, Vendor shall promptly (a) notify DGSL and Subscriber thereof and (b) 
take reasonable and appropriate steps to stop and remediate such noncompliance. In 
addition, if Vendor receives notice that it is not meeting one or more of its obligations 
under this Section  X, Vendor will take reasonable and appropriate steps to stop and 
remediate such noncompliance.  The obligations in this Subsection are in addition to, and 
shall not limit, any other obligations of Vendor pursuant to this Agreement, the Standard 
Cont ractual Clauses , or an alternative legal mechanism that is legally adequate to 
legitimize the processing of Personal Information (such as binding corporate rules).  
9. Vendor shall comply with the Data Privacy Addenda attached to this Agreement.  
10. Vendor’s Perso nnel.  Vendor shall (i) inform its Personnel that have  access to 
Subscriber Data and Personal Information of the requirements in this Section X and (ii) 
ensure that those  Personnel are bound by , and comply , with those  requirements.  
C. Subcontractors . Vendor may not subcontract any part of the Service except in accordance 
with the following process:  
1. Vendor shall provide a list of Subcontractors as of the Effective Date and such 
list shall be attached to this Agreement (the “Approved Subcontractor List”).   The 
Approved Subcontractor List shall specify the name, location, and scope of Services 
provided by the Subcontractor.   Vendor may subcontract the Services to any entity on the 
List   
2. In addition to the foregoing, Vendor will notify Deloitte Firm at least 30 d ays in 
advance of any proposed changes to the Subcontractor List (including any change to the 
identity, location or scope of Services provided by any Subcontractor), which may 
include providing such notice via a subscription service which notifies Deloitte  Firm 
upon any such proposed change to the Approved Subcontractor List.   If Deloitte Firm has 
a reasonable objection to Subcontractor’s processing of Personal Information, Deloitte 
Firm may object to Vendor’s use of such Subcontractor, location, or change in scope by 
notifying Vendor in writing within thirty (30) days after receipt of Vendor’s notice. In 
such event, the parties will work in good faith to discuss a resolution. Vendor may choose 
to: (i) not use the Subcontractor with respect to such Deloitte Firm, (ii) take the corrective 
steps requested by Deloitte Firm to resolve its objection, and use the Subcontractor or 
(iii) any alternative course, including the provision of such Services by Vendor.   If none 
of these options are reasonably possible and D eloitte Firm continues to object, DGSL 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC19 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc may provide notice of termination of the Service as to such Deloitte Firm, and Vendor 
shall issue a refund for all unused but prepaid fees applicable to such Deloitte Firm. If 
Deloitte Firm does not object within thir ty days of receipt of the notice, Deloitte Firm is 
deemed to have accepted the new Subcontractor. The Approved Subcontractor List shall 
be updated accordingly, including deletion of any Subcontractor that has been removed 
from the Approved Subcontractor Li st.   
3. Responsibility for Subcontractors. Prior to entering into an agreement with any 
Subcontractor, Vendor shall be responsible for evaluating the security, privacy and 
confidentiality practices of that proposed Subcontractor. Subcontractor shall have 
security certifications that evidence its use of appropriate security measures in 
accordance with the terms of this Agreement.   Vendor shall enter into a written 
agreement with each Subcontractor. Vendor’s agreement with its subcontractor shall 
impose on the subcontractor obligations that are at least equivalent to those set forth in 
this Agreement.   Vendor shall ensure that each Subcontractor complies with all 
applicable requirements and obligations of Vendor under this Agreement. Vendor will be 
liable for ea ch act, error, or omission of a subcontractor to the same extent Vendor would 
have been had it been an act, error, or omission of Vendor.  
XI. AUDIT  RIGHT .  
A. Upon Subscriber’s reasonable request on one or more occasions, Vendor shall promptly 
provide Subscriber with all information that it requests through its vendor risk assessment process 
and any other  information that it requests regard ing Vendor’s compliance with its obligations 
under Section X, including evidence that demonstrates Vendor’s adherence to stated security 
controls and processes , visibility into Vendor’s security metrics reporting tools , any available 
documentation concerning  Vendor’s security  measures , and any audit reports or results of any 
audits  (including any SOC -2 audits)  or tests  (including penetration and vulnerability tests)  
performed on the Service, Vendor’s Systems , Vendor’s Service Locations, or any component of 
the foregoing . Notwithstanding any restrictions imposed on the disclosure of Confidential 
Information in Section IX, Subs criber  may disclose any audit report or results of any audit that it 
receive s under the foregoing sentence  to its regulators,  clients , and auditors , on the condition that 
they are obligated to keep that information confidential .  
B. Subscriber  may confirm and  validate Vendor’s compliance with the terms of Section X 
through annual  audits of Vendor’s Systems, Vendor’s Service Locations, and Vendor ’s 
documents.   Upon reasonable notice, Subscriber , its Personnel , auditors, and regulators  may 
audit , examine, assess, and review  (i) the Service , (ii) Vendor’s Systems, (iii) Vendor’s Service 
Locations, (iv) Vendor ’s documents, operations , practices, and procedures related to the Service , 
(v) when reasonably feasible Approved Subcontractors, and (v i) any other ite ms necessary for 
Subscriber to comply with applicable law s, regulation s, or professional standard s. Vendor  shall 
provide access , at all reasonable times , to (a) Vendor’s Service Locations and Vendor’s Systems , 
(b) all data and records relating to the Servi ce, and ( c) Vendor Personnel knowledgeable about the 
Service .  
C. For the protection and security of Vendor personnel, facilities, business operations and 
business records, Subscriber ’s audit team shall consider Vendor’s request that Subscriber not  
record, copy, film, photograph, or remove (each as applicable), any materials, records, reports, 
documentations, personnel, or any portion of the facilities .  
D. The audit will not include any internal or external penetration test or internal or external 
vulnerability scan or automated system configuration checks or automated firewall rule -base 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC20 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc checks as Vendor uses a shared infrastructure and providing these details may lead to 
compromise of the security/ privacy of other clients.  
E. Vendor shall bear the cost s of Vendor’s compliance with section X with the exception of 
costs related to DGSL’s personnel or contractors in connection with audits under this section.  
F. If DGSL is not satisfied in its sole discretion after any audit, examination, assessment, or 
review  of Vendor’s compliance with its obligations under Section 10  or any vulnerability scan or 
penetration test , then, at DGSL’s option: ( i) Vendor shall   remediate within a reasonable 
timeframe all issues identified by DGSL so as to be in compliance with Section X and provide 
DGSL with written evidence of remediation ; or ( ii) DGSL may terminate any affected Service 
under  Section XIV B5.  
G. Service Disruption; Ceasing Business Operations; Data Security Compliance Costs .  
Vendor shall promptly inform DGSL if there is any substantial disruption of the Service, 
including any suspected   breach of applicable law , regulation, or the terms of Section X, or other 
material irregularities in relation to the processing of Subscriber Data or Personal Infor mation.  
Vendor shall provide DGSL with at least 90 days’ prior written notice of impending cessation of 
its business  or that of any Approved Subprocessor and take all actions requested in accordance 
with Section XIV C4.   
H. Vendor  is responsible for paying all costs and expenses related to its compliance with its 
obligations under Section X, except to the extent specified otherwise in this Agreement or an 
applicable Certificate of Subscription . Relationship of the Parties.  
I. Where relevant under applicable law , the parties agree that for the following Services the 
controller/processor roles  listed below apply:  
ISOS Service  Subscriber  Intl.SOS  
Travel Tracker  Controller  Processor  
Medical Assistance 
Services  Independent Controller  Independent Controller  
Travel Assistance Services  Independent Controller  Independent Controller  
Security Assistance 
Services  Independent Controller  Independent Controller  
 
J. When Intl.SOS  is acting in its capacity as a processor it shall comply with the Data 
Privacy Addendum for Controller -to-Processor attached to this Agreement.  
K. Where Intl.SOS and Subscriber are acting in their capacities as independent controllers, 
they shall each  comply  with the Data Privacy Addendum for Controller -to-Controller attached to 
this Agreement.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC21 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc XII. DATA HOLD .  
A. Each Subscriber will have exclusive ownership of its own Subscriber Data and no other 
Subscriber will have any control of, or access to, the Subscriber D ata of any other Subscriber, 
unless provided by a Subscriber in the course of using the Service to another Subscriber.   
B. If Subscriber notifies Vendor in writing to hold, freeze or otherwise preserve some or all 
of its Subscriber Data  (a “Data Hold”), Vendor shall implement, within three business days, 
commercially reasonable measures to preserve that Subscriber Data (including related metadata) 
in the state in which it exists at the time Subscriber notifies Vendor of the Data Hold. Vendor’s 
reasonable measures to preserve Subscriber Data subject to a Data Hold will include making a 
“snapshot” or backup copy of the Subscriber Data, disabling write access to the Subscriber Data 
(unless such Subscriber informs Vendor that doing so will interfere wi th its business functions), 
and disabling automatic deletion or maintenance routines. Vendor shall promptly confer with 
Subscriber and its counsel on the measures to be undertaken i f there is  a Data Hold .  If the need 
arises, Vendor will make available to Subscriber a representative who can explain Vendor’s 
preservation efforts to an adversary, a regulatory agency, or a court of law, as required, and 
provide any affidavits or testimony. Within ten business days of receiving a Data Hold request 
from Subscrib er, Vendor shall provide to Subscriber extracted copies of the requested Subscriber 
Data in native format with metadata intact (or in another format suitable for discovery purposes 
or that Vendor and Subscriber jointly agree upon).   If the requested data extraction cannot be 
achieved for technical or other reasons, Vendor shall make available to Subscriber a 
representative who can explain how the Service operates, including to a regulatory agency, a 
court of law, or a party that is in litigation with Subsc riber, as may be required by Subscriber, and 
provide any requested affidavits or testimony.  
C. Upon Subscriber’s Data Hold request (whether to respond to discovery disclosure 
obligations and similar processes or otherwise ), Vendor will furnish to that Subscri ber, within ten 
business days , a summary of the locations, servers, and data storage devices that may contain 
Subscriber Data.  
XIII.  INSURANCE.  
A. Vendor shall secure and maintain adequate insurance to meet its obligations and cover all 
operations and Services pro vided under this Agreement (collectively, “Vendor’s Insurance 
Coverage”), including:  (i) commercial general liability insurance written on a “ claims -made  
basis” that includes coverage for bodily injury, advertising injury, contractual liability  assumed 
under an insured contract , and completed operations ; (ii) workers’ compensation insurance and 
other insurance as required by statutes in the states and countries in which the Services will be 
performed;  (iii) fidelity bon d or commercial crime insurance (including electronic and computer 
crime or unauthorized computer access insurance) ; (iv) errors and omissions insurance; and  (v) 
cyber liability, network security, and privacy liability insurance. For items (i), (ii), and (iii), 
Vendor shall maintain Vend or’s Insurance Coverage with policy limits of at least USD1,000,000 
for each accident, occurrence, claim, wrongful act, or loss (as applicable) and USD2,000,000 in 
the aggregate, or such other amount as required by law or local customary practice, whicheve r is 
greater.  For item (ii) the policy limit shall be in compliance with statutory requirements. For 
items ( iv) and (v) policy limits of at least USD 10,000,000, including in the aggregate, shall be 
maintained.  
B. Vendor’s Insurance Coverage will be (i) under written by one or more insurance 
companies that have an A.M. Best financial strength rating and financial size category of at least 
“A- VIII” and (ii) written as primary policies for the Services and not as policies contributing to, 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC22 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc or to be used in excess  of, any insurance policy or self -insurance program in whic h a Subscriber 
may participate  (except for workers’ compensation, fidelity bond or commercial rime, errors and 
omissions, and cyber liability, network security and privacy liability insurance) . If Vendor’s 
Insurance coverage includes any “claims made” insurance, Vendor shall ensure that all acts, 
errors, and omissions of Vendor and its Personnel are “continually covered” during the term of 
this Agreement and for a period of at least three years afte r this Agreement is terminated, 
including, as applicable, by purchas ing “tail insurance” if Vendor’s insurance coverage lapses or 
“nose insurance” and “tail insurance” if Vendor changes insurance companies.   
C. Vendor shall name the Deloitte Firms as additio nal insureds on each applicable policy in 
Vendor’s Insurance Coverage  (except for workers’ compensation, fidelity bond or commercial 
rime, errors and omissions, and cyber liability, network security and privacy liability insurance) ..  
On or before the Effe ctive Date and thereafter upon DGSL’s reasonable request, Vendor shall 
provide DGSL with certified copies of all applicable endorsements and certificates of insurance, 
which will (i) provide prior written notice to DGSL of any proposed cancellation or expi ration 
without renewal, or any material modification or change to the terms, of any Vendor Insurance 
Coverage, and (ii) indicate that the Deloitte Firms  have been endorsed as an additional insured for 
the Vendor Insurance Coverage , as applicable .  Upon DGS L’s request, Vendor shall provide 
DGSL with certified copies of the policies included in Vendor’s Insurance Coverage .  
D. Vendor shall pay all costs and expenses related to Vendor’s Insurance Coverage and its 
compliance with this Section  XII.  If any policy i n Vendor’s Insurance Coverage is in excess of a 
deductible or self -insured retention, Vendor shall pay any such deductible or self -insured 
retention.  
E. All Approved Subcontract ors are subject to the requirements of this Section XII, and each 
Approved Subcont ractor shall procure and maintain the same coverage required of Vendor under 
this Section XII.  Vendor shall include all Approved Subcontractors as additional insureds under 
its policies (other than workers’ compensation) or shall ensure that each Approved  Subcontractor 
maintains the required insurance coverage.  Upon DGSL’s request, Vendor shall provide proof of 
insurance for each Approved Subcontractor.  
F. The insurance coverage stated in this Section XII is the minimum requirement, and th is 
requirement do es not lessen or limit the liability of Vendor or any Approved Subcontractor .  
Vendor  shall maintain, at its own expense, any additional kinds or amounts of insurance that it 
considers  necessary to cover its obligations and liabilities under this Agreement.  
XIV. NOTICES.   
A. All notices given hereunder shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to be duly given if 
delivered by a ny of the following methods: ( i) by electronic mail or facsimile; ( ii) by personal 
delivery; ( iii) by registered or certified mail, postage pre paid, return receipt requested; or ( iv) by a 
globally or nationally (as the case may be) recognized express mail, courier, or delivery service 
(“Express Courier ”). A notice sent by electronic mail or facsimile shall be deemed given on the 
date of electroni c confirmation of receipt.  A notice sent by personal delivery, certified mail or 
Express Courier shall be deemed give n on the date of receipt or refusal of receipt.  
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, notices of breach or termination sent by Email or 
facsimile are not valid unless also sent and received by one of the other methods stated herein.   
C. Notices shall be sent to the respective addresses/contacts of each Party as follows, and 
any change of address/contact shall be made according to the procedure stated a bove.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC23 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc ALL  Notices to Intl.SOS  shall go to:    
International SOS Assistance, Inc.  
3600 Horizon Blvd, Suite 300 Trevose, PA 19053  
Attn:  Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  
Email:  __Jarrett.Michau@internationalsos.com ________________  
Fax: 215-942-8226 _ 
 
 
ALL  Notices to DGSL regarding any matter pertaining to this Agreement shall go to:  
Deloitte Global Services Limited  
1221 Avenue of the Americas     
39th Floor, New York, NY 10020, USA  
 Attn: Global Procurement Administrator  
Email: globalprocurement@deloitte.com  
Fax: 212 -492-3463  
 
Provided  that any Notices to DGSL regarding Breach  or Termination  of this Agreement shall also 
go to:  
Deloitte Global Services Limited  
1221 Avenue of the Americas     
39th Floor, New York, NY 10020, USA  
 Attn: Global Procurement Administrator  
Email: globalprocurement@deloitte.com  
Fax: 212 -492-3463  
 
ALL  Notices to a Participating Firm regarding any  matter  pertaining to this Agreement shall go to 
the contact specified in the Participating Firm’s Participati on Agreement.  
XV. TERM AND TERMINATION .  
A. Term.  This Agreement shall be effective as of the Effective Date and continue until 
terminated as provided herein.  
B. Termination.   
1. Termination for Bankruptcy, etc . Either DGSL (but no other Deloitte Firm) or 
Vendor may te rminate immediately (i) this Agreement and/or (ii) any Service, in each 
case if the other Party ceases business operations, makes a general assignment for the 
benefit of creditors, becomes insolvent or the subject of voluntary bankruptcy or 
receivership pr oceedings, or if bankruptcy or receivership proceedings are initiated 
against it and not lifted within 10 days.  
2. Termination of Agreement for Breach.  Either DGSL (but no other Deloitte Firm) 
or Vendor may terminate this Agreement upon 30 days’ prior written  notice of 
termination, for material breach of this Agreement by the other Party, if the other Party 
does not cure such breach within such 30 day period.  Such notice shall set forth in 
reasonable detail the nature of the breach and the date of termination.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC24 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc 3. Termination of Service for Breach.  DGSL (but no other Deloitte Firm) may 
terminate any Service, upon 30 days’ prior written notice of termination, for Vendor’s 
material breach of the terms of such Service, if Vendor does not cure such breach within 
such 30 day period.  Such notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the nature of the 
breach and the date of termination.  Material breach of the terms of any Service shall be 
considered a material breach of this Ag reement which shall allow DGSL (but no other 
Deloitte Firm), if it so chooses, to also terminate this Agreement as set forth in 
Subsection 2  above.  DGSL (but no other Deloitte Firm) may also terminate a Service as 
set forth in the Service Levels and Suppor t Schedule attached hereto.  
4. Independence.  DGSL may also terminate this Agreement  if DGSL determines in 
its sole  discretion  that the existence of this Agreement or any performance under this 
Agreement  would be in conflict with any independence requirements , professional rules, 
or laws relating to the provision of audit or accounting services by any Deloitte Firm.  
5. Security  Incident or Material Breach of Security Obligations .  DGSL may 
immediately terminate this Agreement, without incurring any liability or p enalty, by 
delivery of  written notice of termination  upon the occurrence of either  (i) any Security 
Incident  that results in Subscriber  determining that Subscriber  Data or Personal 
Information  is at risk with Vendor or  (ii) any material breach of Vendor’s  obligations 
under Section s IX or X. That termination will be effective as of the date specified by 
DGSL in its notice of termination. This termination right does not limit, and is in addition 
to, any other right that DGSL may have to terminate this Agreeme nt and any other 
remedy that available to DGSL or any other Subscriber.  
6. Termination of Agreement, Service, or Certificates of Subscription .  In addition 
to the foregoing, DGSL may at any time, for any reason or for no reason, terminate 
performance under this Agreement or any Certificate of Subscription  or any Service 
provided by the Vendor, in whole or in part, by 30 days’ prior written notice of 
termination to the Vendor, which notice shall state the extent to which such performance 
shall be terminated an d the date upon which such termination shall become effective.  
Upon receipt of such notice the Vendor shall:  
a) Stop work on the date and to the extent specified in such notice; and  
b) Take such further action regarding termination as DGSL  may reasonably 
direct  (including continuing to provide the Services until the effective date of 
termination) . 
7. In the event of a partial termination  of this Agreement or any Certificate of 
Subscription , the Vendor  shall proceed with the performance of such part of the Services 
as is not terminated, and the amount payable under thi s Agreement and the applicable 
Certificate of Subscription  shall be reduced, as mutually agreed upon by the Parties , to 
reflect the performance to be continued.    
8. Continued Provision of Service . Vendor agrees to continue to provide the Service 
during any breach or alleged breach unless and until such obligations are terminated as  
provided herein . 
C. Effect of Termination; Survival.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC25 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc 1. Termination of this Agreement shall automatically terminate all Services and  all 
Certificates of Subscription .  
2. Termination of any Service and/or any Certificate of Subscription  shall not 
terminate this Agreement unless DGSL provides notice that specifically states that this 
Agreement is also being terminated.   
3. Upon termination of  any Service or Certificate of Subscription  for termination in 
the event of a breach , DGSL shall promptly receive a pro -rata refund from Vendor of all 
pre-paid  the Fees for such Service Certificate of Subscription , calculated on a daily basis.  
4. If this Agr eement or  any Service or Certificate of Subscription  is terminated , 
then,  at DGSL’s option, Vendor shall continue to provide the Service for twelve months  
following the date of termination or such shorter period as requested by DGSL  (that 
period of time, t he “Transition Period ”). During the Transition Period, Vendor shall 
cooperate with, and take such action and is reasonably requested by, Subscriber  to 
transition all Subscriber Data in Vendor’s possession or under Vendor’s control from 
Vendor to Subscriber  or a third party  designated by Subscriber , as applicable. I f this 
Agreement or any Service or Service Order is terminated due to  Vendor’s breach, ceasing 
business operations, bankruptcy, insolvency or receivership, then Vendor will provide the 
Service during the Transition Period (i) free of a Subscription Fee  during the first three 
months of the Transition Period and ( ii)at the  rates paid by DGSL for the Service 
immediately before the  Transition Period  except with respect to the Services under 
Annex B, Section 1 for which the DGSL or the Participating firm shall pay the 
Reimbursements . If this Agreement or any Service or Service is terminated due to  any 
other reason, then Vendor will provide the Service  during the Transition Period at the 
rates paid by DGSL for the Service  immediately before the Transition Period .  The 
transition of Subscriber Data during the Transition Period will be done through a 
mutually agreed standard conversion format and on elect ronic and digital media 
reasonably requested by DGSL.   
5. Sections I, IIB, IIC, IVB, IVC, IVD, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIVC, 
XIVD, and XV shall survive termination of this Agreement.   
D. Participating Firms .  
1. No Termination of This Agreement; Termination of Participation . 
Notwithstanding any other term herein, any breach or other action or inaction by a 
Participating Firm shall not be grounds for termination of this Agreement; provided  that 
Vendor may terminate a Participating Firm’s participat ion (in whole but not in part) in 
this Agreement upon 30 days’ prior written notice to DGSL and such Participating Firm 
of termination, for material breach of such Participating Firm’s obligations under its 
Participation Agreement and/or this Agreement, if  the Participating Firm does not cure 
such breach within such 30 day period.  Such notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the 
nature of the breach and the date of termination.   A Participa ting Firm’s participation in 
this Agreement shall terminate , upo n 30 days’ prior written notice of termination,  if 
Participating Firm determines in its reasonable  discretion based on industry standards that 
its participation in this Agreement or any performance hereunder would be in conflict 
with any independence requi rements, professional rules, or laws relating to the provision 
of audit or accounting services by Participating Firm or any of its affiliated entities within 
such Participating Firm’s Territory .  In addition, a Participating Firm’s participation in 
this Ag reement shall terminate as set forth in its Participation Agreement.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC26 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc 2. Effect of Termination of Participation.  Upon termination of a Participating 
Firm’s participation in this Agreement, such Participating Firm shall no longer have any 
right to receive addi tional Service from Vendor hereunder.   
XVI. GENERAL TERMS.  
A. Construction . 
Agreement Headings and Numbering . Section and paragraph headings and numbers used in this 
Agreement are included for convenience of reference only and, if there is any conflict between 
any such numbers and headings and the text of this Agreement, the text shall control.  
Including.  As used in this Agreement, the word “including” means “including, without 
limitation,”  and the word “include” means “include, without limitation,”.  
B. Entire Agre ement . This Agreement (plus, in the case of each Participating Firm, such 
Participating Firm’s Participation Agreement) constitutes the full and complete agreement of the 
Parties with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersedes all prior and contem poraneous 
understandings and  agreements , both written and oral,  between the Parties with respect to its 
subject matter.   This Agreement supersedes and terminates the Corporate Comprehensive Service 
Program Contract , dated as of June 1, 2008, by and between  Deloitte Global Services Limited,  
International SOS Assistance, Inc. , and Control Risks Group LTD . 
C. Participation Agreements . Each Participating Firm’s Participation Agreement is an 
integral part of this Agreement with respect to Vendor and such Participat ing Firm only.  In the 
event of a c onflict between the terms of this Agreement and any Participation Agreement, the 
terms of this Agreement shall prevail.  
D. Ancillary Documents.  Any Schedule, Exhibit, Appendix or attachment to this Agreement 
is an integral part of this Agreement.  In the event  that there is any conflict in the terms of any 
such document on the one hand and this Agreement on the other, the terms of  this Agreement 
shall prevail.  
E. Invoices; Conflict . No invoice shall add to, delete or otherwise modify the terms of this 
Agreement.  Payment of an invoice shall not be considered a waiver by DGSL of the preceding 
sentence or an agreement by DGSL to any terms in such invoice that would otherwise violate the 
preceding sentence.  
F. Certificates of Subscrip tion; Conflict.  Any Certificate of Subscription  is an integral p art 
of this Agreement.  Except as set forth in the following sentence, the terms of this Agreement shall 
prevail over any conflicting terms in a Certificate of Subscription . In the event a Certificate of 
Subscription  that is signed on behalf of both Vendor and DGSL  states that specifi c terms of this 
Agreement are revised, supplemented, or amended by such Certificate of Subscription , then such 
Certificate of Subscription  will prevail only with re spect to (i) such specifically referenced terms 
and (ii) the Service ordered pursuant to such Certificate of Subscription ; provided  that, 
notwithstanding the foregoing, no Certificate of Subscription  may revise, supplement, or amend 
Section VII (Indemnific ation ), Section VIII (Limitation of Liability ), Section IX 
(Confidentiality ), Section X (Data Security ; Privacy ) and such Sections may only be revised , 
supplemented, or amended  pursuant to a separate document as provided in Subsection  G below.   
G. Amendments.  Except as set f orth in Subsection  F above  Certificate of Subscription , this 
Agreement may only be  revised, supplemented, or  amended by a writ ten document signed on 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC27 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc behalf of both Vendor and DGSL (but not any other Deloitte Firm) that specifically states t hat it 
is intended to revise, supplement, or amend this Agreement . DGSL shall provide the Participating 
Firms with access to any such revision, supplement or amendment signed on behalf of DGSL and 
Vendor as provided in the Participation Agreements.  With re spect to any Participation 
Agreement, such revision, supplement , or amendment shall be considered an amendment to this 
Agreement and be applicable to each Participating Firm as set forth in its Participation 
Agreement.   
H. Severability.  If any term in this Ag reement is invalid , illegal,  or unenforceabl e in any 
jurisdiction , such term  shall be reformed to the maximum extent allowed by law to reflect the 
original  intent of the Parties (or, in absence of such intent, the same economic effect) as closely as 
possib le to the invalid , illegal,  or unenforceable term , and the other terms of this Agreement will 
remain in full force and effect in such jurisdiction . Such invalidity, illegality, or unenforceability 
shall not affect any other term in this Agreement , or inval idate or render unenforceable such term , 
in any other jurisdiction .  
I. Waiver of Breach.  No waiver of any breach, or of any objection to any act or omission 
connected therewith, shall be implied or claimed by any of the Parties, or be deemed to constitute 
a consent to any continuation of such breach, act or omission, unless contained in a wri ting signed 
on be half of the Party against whom enforcement of such waiver or consent is sought.   
J. Remedies Not Exclusive.  Exercise or enforcement of a right or remedy given in this 
Agreement shall not be considered to be in lieu of enforcement of other rig hts or remedies  
otherwise existing at law or equity, unless specifically waived in writing.  
K. Applicable Laws.  Except as set forth in Clauses IX and XI of the Standard Contractual 
Clauses with respect to the Standard Contractual Clauses,  all matters arising out of or otherwise 
relating to this  Agreement , including  all rights  and obligations of the Parties arising out of  or 
otherwise re lating to this Agreement, shall be governed by, construed in accordance with, and 
enforced under, the laws (both substantive a nd procedural) of the State of New York, USA (but 
specifically excluding the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the Intern ational Sale of 
Goods), without giving effect to any choice or conflict of law provision or rule (whether of the 
State of New York or any other jurisdiction). Any legal suit, action, or proceeding arising out of 
or otherwise relating to this Agreement or the transactions contemplated hereby shall be instituted 
in the Federal Courts of the United States of America or the courts of  the State of New York, in 
each case located in the Borough of Manhattan and County of New York, and each Party 
irrevocably submits to the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts in any such suit, action or 
proceeding.   
L. Waiver of Jury Trial . Each Party hereb y agrees to irrevocably waive its right to a jury 
trial in any action, proceeding or counterclaim, whether in contract, statute, tort (including 
negligence) or otherwise, relating to this Agreement or the subject matter hereof.  
M. Assignment . This Agreement m ay be assigned by DGSL in whole but not in part to any 
other Deloitte Firm.  Any licenses granted hereunder  that are held by Subscriber may be 
transferred to another Deloitte Firm that agrees to be bound by the terms hereof with respect to 
such licenses.  Any Party hereto may assign this Agreement in whole but not in part to any 
successor entity . Except as set forth in the preceding sentences, no Party may assign this 
Agreement, in whole or in part, to any third party, without the express prior written consen t of the 
other Party.  This Agreement shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of the Parties and 
their respective successors and permitted assigns.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC28 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc N. Relationship of the Parties . No agency, partnership, franchise, or joint venture is created 
among or between any of the Parties by this Agreement.  
O. Bankruptcy . DGSL  and each Participating Firm will retain and may fully exercise all of 
its rights under the United States Bankruptcy Code, as it may be amended or supplemented from 
time to time (the “C ode”).  In the event of the commencement of a bankruptcy case or proceeding 
by or against Vendor  under the Code, DGSL  and each Participating Firm will be entitled to retain 
all of its rights under this Agreement to any “intellectual property” (as defined in  11 U.S.C. § 
101(35A)) that may be deemed licensed to DGSL  and such Participating Firm under this 
Agreement, and, if Vendor  files for bankruptcy, or if any action or proceeding under the Code is 
filed against Vendor, this Agreement will be governed by, and  DGSL and each  Participating Firm 
shall be entitled to the rights and protections provided pursuant to, 11 U.S.C. § 365(n), as the 
same may be amended or supplemented from time to time.  
P. No Construction Against Drafter . If an ambiguity or question of intent  or interpretation 
arises with respect to any term of this Agreement, this Agreement will be construed as if drafted 
jointly by the Parties and no presumption or burden of proof will arise , and no rule shall be 
enforced,  favoring or disfavoring any Party b y virtue of authorship of any of the terms of this 
Agreement.  
Q. Counterparts . This Agreement and each Certificate of Subscription , and any amendments 
hereto or thereto, may be signed and delivered in one or more counterparts, all of which shall 
constitute on e and the same instrument.  Facsimile, photo or electronically produced copies of this 
signed Agreement or of any signed Certificate of Subscription  or amendment will legally bind the 
Parties to the same extent as an original document.  
R. Force Majeure . 
S. A “Force Majeure Event ” shall mean an act  of nature (including fire, flood, earthquake, 
storm, or other natural disaster); war, terrorism or similar hostilities (whether declared or not); 
nationalization, embargo or similar unforeseen government action; and othe r similar events that 
are, in each case, both proximately caused by events beyond the reasonable control of the Party 
claiming the Force Majeure Event and occurring without its fault or negligence.   
T. No Party shall be liable for any delay or default in per forming hereunder if such delay or 
default is caused by a Force Majeure Event; provided  that, as a condition to such non -liability (i) 
such Party shall give the other Party reasonably prompt written notice of the delay or default and 
of the nature of the F orce Majeure Event, and (ii) the suspension of performance shall be no 
longer duration and no greater in scope than is reasonably required by the Force Majeure Event.  
U. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, if the Party claiming the Force Majeure 
Event is not able to materially perform under this Agreement for fifteen d ays, then the other Party 
shall have the option of terminating this Agreement (or the applicable Certificate of Subscription  
or Service) upon notice to the claiming Party and DGSL shall receive a pro -rata refund of all 
related pre -paid Fees.  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC29 
Intl.SOS - COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAM - 03.doc IN WITNESS WHEREOF , each of DGSL and Vendor has caused this Agreement to be signed 
by its duly authorized representative and become effe ctive as of the Effective Date.  
Vendor:       DGSL:  
International SOS Assistance, Inc.    Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Services, LLC  
       As agent for Deloitte Global Services Limited  
 
By:       By:       
Name:  Paul Jarrett Michau     Name:        
Title:  Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  Title:         
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC
Rhonda England
Global Chief Procurement Officer30 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE A - DISCOUNT SCHEDULE    
1. Scope . Subject to the terms of this Agreement, DGSL or a Participating Firm may purchase any 
Service and/or other products and services from Vendor.  
2. Account Manager.  Vendor will designate an “Account Manager” who will have primary 
responsibility for day to day  management of the overall business relationship between DGSL and 
Vendor. The Vendor’s Account Manager will be DGSL’s primary point of contact for the escalation 
and resolution of problems with respect to purchases under this Agreement. Vendor’s Account 
Manager will be:  
Name:  Roy Benninghoff  
Email:  roy.benninghoff@internationalsos.com  
Phone:  +1 215 391 8672  
Address:  3600 Horizon Blvd Trevose PA 19053  
The Account Manager may be changed upon prior written notice to DGSL.  
3. Ordering Procedures . DGSL may place o rders under this Agreement by contacting the Account 
Manager identified above. The Account Manager will then generate a price quote for DGSL. Once 
DGSL has determined that the price quote meets DGSL’s needs, in its sole discretion, DGSL will 
generate a Certificate of Subscription , in substantially the same form as the one that is attached 
hereto, and submit that to Vendor’s Account Manager for processing. The price quote is not part of 
this Agreement and not binding on DGSL.  
4. Service Discounts .  In the event  the DGSL  elects to use Vendor  to provide assistance in obtaining a 
guarantee of payment to its  third party providers  in the United States of America for Covered 
Personnel  not otherwise insured , Vendor  will, where possible, obtain discounts and savings for  third 
party provider fees. Such discounts and savings may be either (i) a direct result of a pre -negotiated 
reduction in the fee of medical services rendered by third party providers or (ii) a result from a 
process of re -pricing negotiation.  In both case s, such discounts and savings shall be deducted from 
the cost of treatment at the time individual invoices are issued.  Where Vendor  secures discounts on 
behalf of DGSL , Vendor  shall pass on 65% of such negotiated discounts to DGSL . 
5. Fee Increases :  
The Subscription Fees under this Agreement shall remain the same  during each Term  of this 
Agreement, unless otherwise amended in accordance with this Agreement. Thereafter, on an annual 
basis, the Subscription Fees  will be subject to an adjustment as of the Re newal Date   
For the avoidance of doubt a change  in excess of +/ - 5% to the declared population as set forth on the 
applicable Subscriber’s Declaration may result in an adjustment to the Subscription Fee.  
The below formula for calculating annual fees for th e Services , entitled the Pricing Matrix for 2018 -
2023, applies for the period of June 1, 2018 through May 31, 2023.  
 
6. Pricing Matrix for 2018 -2023  
Loss Ratio  means  Claims paid by the insurer divided by the Risk Management Cost received for 
taking on the lia bility associated with the insurance aspect of the membership program.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC31 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Risk Management Cost  means  Fees collected by the insurer for the liability associated with the 
insurance aspect of the membership program.  
 
As in reference to the Services described in Schedule B section 1,   if the Loss Ratio o f the most recent 5 
years of experience falls between:  
75.33% and 78.63%  Loss Ratio :   10% reduction in fee  from the current membership period  
78.64% and 81.94%  Loss Ratio :   5% reduction in fee  from the current me mbership period  
81.95% and 85.23%  Loss Ratio :   Flat renewal  with the current membership period  
85.24% and 88.52%  Loss Ratio :   5% increase in fee  from the current membership period  
88.53% and 91.83%  Loss Ratio :   10% increase in fee  from the current membership period   
 
If the claims experience exceeds a 91.83% loss ratio, Intl.SOS reserves the right to re -evaluate the 
fees  
 
7. For the other renewal components:  
With regard to Travel Security Management Service, Communications Portal, Corporate Security Access 
and Travel Tracker, the Fees for each Renewal Term  shall not increase by more than 3% increase over the 
prior Term.  
With regard to Corporate Security Access  and Travel Tracker , renewal each year is at  3%.   
8. For another other produ cts or services purchased by DGSL or a Participating  Firm  the fees for such 
products and services shall be in addition the fees herein.  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC32 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE B – SERVICES SCHEDULE  
 
 
1. MEDICAL ASSISTANCE SERVICES  
1.1. The Services set out in this Section 1  will be provided by Intl.SOS 24 hours a day, 365 days a 
year upon request of any Authorized Person or Covered Personnel who shall contact an 
Intl.SOS Assistance Center in accordance with the Operations and Billings Procedure. If the 
Services are requested by Covered Individual s, Intl.SOS shall require the authorization of 
the Authorized Persons before delivering such Services. The Subscriber shall pay no 
additional fees to Intl.SOS in respect of such Services.  
Intl.SOS Services are not a substitute for loc al emergency services.  
a. Evacuation and repatriation  
i. Intl.SOS  will arrange and pay for the air and/or surface transportation, medical care during 
transportation, communications and shall pay or arrange to guarantee to pay on behalf of 
the Subscriber, all usual and customary ancillary charges incurred in moving  and 
transporting a Covered Individual  from the local point of initial medical care to the nearest 
hospital where appropriate medical care is available, that may be a location other than the 
Covered Individual ’s Home Country or Country of Assignment. Intl.SOS  services are not 
a substitute for local emergency services.  
ii. Intl.SOS will arrange and pay for the transport of the Covered Individual  to the Home 
Country or Country of Assignment following a medical evacuation for subsequent in -
patient hospitalization or rehabilitative treatment.   
iii. When Intl.SOS undertakes a medical transportation, Intl.SOS will recommend to the 
Subscriber the most appropriate timing, means or method by which such evacuation or 
repatriation will be carried out, the medical supervision requ irements and location option(s) 
to which the Covered Individual  should be evacuated. In making such arrangements, 
Intl.SOS may consider all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the Covered 
Individual ’s medical condition, the degree of urgen cy, the Covered Individual ’s fitness to 
travel, airport availability, weather conditions, local law and regulatory requirements, 
travel distance and whether transportation will be provided by private medically equipped 
aircraft, helicopter, regular schedul ed flight, rail, water or land vehicle.   The Subscriber 
will then make an authorization determination on this basis. Intl.SOS reserves the right not 
to undertake the medical transportation service if it is deemed in the opinion of Intl.SOS to 
be detrimenta l to the patient’s or crew’s  health , safety or if in contravention to local law or 
regulatory requirements.  
b. Transportation Assistance: Companion, Family Members and Minor Children  
i. Following a Covered Individual ’s medical evacuation, Intl.SOS will arrange and pay for 
economy class transportation and accommodation for a relative or friend to join a Covered 
Individual  who has or will be hospitalized for more than seven (7) days outside the Home 
Country or Country of Assignment.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC33 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  ii. Intl.SOS will coordinate emerg ency travel arrangements for family members who wish to 
accompany a hospitalized Covered Individual . 
iii. If a Covered Individual  has minor children who are left unattended as a result of a Covered 
Individual ’s injury, illness or medical evacuation, Intl.SOS wi ll arrange for transportation 
of such minor children to the Covered Individual ’s Home Country or Country of 
Assignment.  
c. Additional travel after medical evacuation  
Following a Covered Individual ’s medical evacuation, Intl.SOS will arrange to transport the 
Covered Individual  to the Covered Individual 's Home Country or Country of Assignment or 
arrange the continuation of the Covered Individual ’s trip.   
d. Repatriation of mortal remains  
In the event of the Covered Individual ’s death, Intl.SOS  will arrange and pay to transport the 
Covered Individual ’s mortal remains from the place of death to the Covered Individual ’s Home 
Country, or, if requested in writing by a family member or legal representative and if permitted by 
applicable laws and proc edures and if available and practicable, Intl.SOS will arrange for a local 
burial or cremation at the place of death.  
e. Membership Limitations  
Intl.SOS' obligation to pay for Medical Assistance Services shall be subject to a limitation of 
$2,000,000 per Cove red Individual  per Intervention . 
1.2. The Services set out in this Section 1.2 shall be provided by Intl.SOS 24 hours a day, 365 days 
a year upon request of any Authorized Person or Covered Individual  who shall contact an 
Intl.SOS Assistance Center in accordanc e with the Operations and Billings Procedure. The 
Subscriber shall pay to Intl.SOS the Reimbursements in respect of such Services. Intl.SOS 
will provide the following Services for Covered Personnel , upon request of the Subscriber’s 
Authorized Person, subje ct to payment of Intl.SOS’ additional fees as described in the 
Schedule of Fees:  
a. Medical expense guarantee, cost review & payment, medical monitoring  
Intl.SOS will guarantee and pay as an agent for the Subscriber all costs associated with a Covered 
Individual ’s in-patient or out -patient medical care, including the arrangement and confirmation of 
appointments with third party Medical Service Providers, and assistance in arranging 
accommodation, post appointment communications and follow up with Covere d third party 
Medical Service Providers and Covered Individual s. Intl.SOS will provide the Authorized Person 
with information on the Covered Individual ’s medical assistance requirements and medical 
monitoring reporting in accordance with Annex I  to this Schedule B.   
b. Dispatch of medication and medical supplies  
Intl.SOS will, when and where practical and legally permissible, arrange for the delivery of 
medicines, drugs and medical supplies that are medically necessary for the Covered Individual ’s 
care and treatment but which are not available at or near the Covered Individual ’s location.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC34 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  1.3. The Services set out in this Section 1.3 of Annex II (Scope of Service) will be provided by 
Intl.SOS 24 hours a day, 365 days a year upon request of any Authorized Person or Covered 
Individual  who shall contact an Intl.SOS Assistance Center in accordance with the 
Operations and Billings Procedure. The Subscriber shall pay no additional fees to Intl.SOS 
in respect of such Services.  
a. Emergency & routine medical advice  
Intl.SOS will arrange for the provision of medical advice over the telephone or other Intl.SOS 
nominated communication channel as may be available for any Covered Individual  contacting an 
Intl.SOS Assistance Center.  
b. Travel health information  
Covered Indivi duals will have access to web, email and ‘Assistance App’ based travel health 
information that provides background information on travel destinations and timely and detailed 
analysis/assessments on current and emerging health threats.   Online information i ncludes the 
following features:  
i. Updates on existing or developing health risks;  
ii. Country medical guides; and  
iii. Country medical risk ratings.  
The information provided under this Section  remains at all time the property of Intl.SOS, and is 
only for the benefit and use of the Subscriber and Covered Individual s. Unless stated otherwise, 
this information cannot be quoted, published, or redistributed in any way, shape or form, by the 
Subscriber and Covered Individual s without the express permission of Intl.SOS.  
c. Medi cal & dental referrals  
Intl.SOS will provide the Covered Individual  with names, addresses, telephone numbers and if 
requested by a Covered Individual  and if available, office hours for physicians, hospitals, clinics, 
dentists and dental clinics within the area where the Covered Individual  is located.  These 
recommendations are based upon the best judgment of Intl.SOS and its knowledge of the local 
cond itions and availability of medical services at the location.  Intl.SOS does not guarantee the 
quality of the Medical Service Providers nor shall Intl.SOS be liable for any consequences arising 
out of or caused by the services provided by the Medical Servic e Providers.  The final selection of 
Medical Service Providers shall be the responsibility of the Covered Individual . 
d. Out-patient arrangements  
Intl.SOS will assist Covered Individual s with the arrangement and confirmation of appointments 
with Medical Servi ce Providers, as well as arrange accommodation, post appointment 
communications and follow up with Covered Individual s. 
e. Assistance with documentation for insurance claim  
Intl.SOS will assist Covered Individual s in obtaining the necessary documentation for medical 
insurance claims for care involving Intl.SOS’ Services on a reasonable commercial efforts basis.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC35 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  2. TRAVEL ASSISTANCE SERVICES  
2.1. The Services set out in this Section 2 .1 shall be provided by Intl.SOS 24 hou rs a day, 365 days 
a year upon request of any Authorized Person or Covered Individual  who shall contact an 
Intl.SOS Assistance Center in accordance with the Operations and Billings Procedure. The 
Subscriber shall pay no additional fees to Intl.SOS in respe ct of such Services.  
a. Emergency message transmission  
Intl.SOS will use all reasonable commercial efforts to receive and transmit emergency messages 
between Covered Individual s and their family.  
b. Emergency translation and interpreter services  
In the event of an emergency situation, Intl.SOS will provide personal telephone translation 
services and referrals of interpreter services through its Assistance Center network.  
c. Lost document advice & assistance  
Intl.SOS will assist Covered Individual s who have lost important travel documents (e.g. passport, 
credit cards) by providing instructions for recovery or replacement.  
V. 2.2 The Services set out in this Section 2.2 will be provided by Intl.SOS 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year upon request of any Auth orized Person or Covered Individual  who shall 
contact an Intl.SOS Assistance Cent er in accordance with the Operations and Billings Procedure. 
If the Services are requested by Covered Individual s, Intl.SOS shall require the authori zation of 
the Authori zed Persons before delivering such Services. The Subscriber shall pay to Intl.SOS the 
Reimbursements in respect of such Services.  
a. Advance of emergency personal cash  
Intl.SOS will provide Covered Individual s with cash advances up to a limit of US Dollars Five 
Thousand (US$ 5,000) or its equivalent in local currency subject to the Authorized Person’s prior 
written approval, and agreement to reimburse Intl.SOS for the advance.  
b. Special translation and interpret er services  
Upon the Authorized Person’s written request, Intl.SOS will arrange for interpreters or translation 
services.  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC36 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc   
3. SECURITY ASSISTANCE SERVICES  
3.1. The Services set out in this Section 3.1 will be provided 24 hours a day, 365 days a year to any 
Authorized Person or Covered Individual  who shall contact an Intl.SOS Assistance Center in 
accordance with the Operations and Billings Procedure.  The Subscrib er shall pay no 
additional fees to Intl.SOS in respect of such Services.  
Intl.SOS Services are not a substitute for local emergency services.   
a. Online Information and Analysis   
Covered Individual s will have access to web, email and ‘Assistance App’ based se curity 
information that provides background information on travel destinations and timely and detailed 
analysis/assessments on current and emerging threats.   Online information includes the following 
features:  
i. Destination guides including risk ratings, sec urity advice, cultural advice and practical 
information;  
ii. Alerts on existing or developing travel security risks;  
iii. Evacuation notifications providing recommendations on the relocation or withdrawal of 
staff in response to major crises; and  
iv. Weekly Region Security Forecast highlighting major risk related events in the week ahead.  
The information provided under this Section remains at all time the property of Intl.SOS, and is 
only for the benefit and use of the Subscriber and Covered Individual s. Unless stat ed otherwise, 
this information cannot be quoted, published, or redistributed in any way, shape or form, by the 
Subscriber and Covered Individual s without the express permission of Intl.SOS.  
b. Security Advice and Assistance   
Covered Individual s will have telephone access 24 hours a day, 365 days a year to Intl.SOS security 
specialists for up -to-date travel security assessments, timely and expert advice including general 
travel security concerns, pre -travel advice on managing an emerging risk an d assistance in response 
to a critical situation.  Response in the case of a kidnap and ransom or extortion case is not included 
within the Subscription Fee but can be made available on request under separate arrangements. Call 
handling and operations deliv ery shall follow the Operations and Billings Procedure. Security 
advice is based on countries and cities referred to above or for other locations where the amount of 
research required to answer the Subscriber questions does not exceed two (2) hours, and/or  does 
not incur additional costs. In the event additional research needs to be undertaken, additional fees 
will apply. The scope of work and associated fees will be agreed between Intl.SOS and the 
Subscriber before the research work commences.  
c. Security Ref errals  
Intl.SOS may provide the Covered Individual  with names, addresses, telephone numbers for 
security firms, taxi or hotel (collectively called ‘Security Referrals') within the area where the 
Covered Individual  is located.   These recommendations are bas ed upon the best judgment of 
Intl.SOS and its knowledge of the local conditions and availability of services at the 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC37 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  location.   Intl.SOS does not guarantee the quality of the Security Referrals nor shall Intl.SOS be 
liable for any consequences arising out o f or caused by the services provided by the Security 
Referrals.  The final selection of Security Referrals shall be the responsibility of the Covered 
Individual . 
d. Establishment of a Crisis Center  
In the event of a developing Emergency Security Situation, Int l.SOS will determine, at its sole 
discretion, the need for establishing a crisis center, its duration and location, based upon the severity 
of the situation and resources at its disposal in the country or region of concern or elsewhere.  Under 
the crisis c enter, Intl.SOS may deploy a security team or activate local security providers to 
facilitate close support to Covered Individual s.  The deployment elements shall be directed by the 
responsible region security center and supported by the cross -functional m edical, security, aviation 
and logistics team in the responsible center.   The crisis center Personnel will use their reasonable 
commercial efforts to provide Covered Individual s in the area with practical advice and review of 
the security situation.    
3.2. The Services set out in this Section 3.2 of shall be provided by Intl.SOS 24 hours a day, 365 
days a year to any Authorized Person or Covered Individual  who shall contact an Intl.SOS  
Assistance Center in accordance with the Operations and Billings Procedure. The Subscriber 
shall pay to Intl.SOS the Reimbursements in respect of such Services. Arrangement of 
Emergency Evacuation Assistance shall be provided solely to Travelers and Expat riates and 
shall not be provided to nationals in their own country.  
a. Arrangement of Emergency Evacuation Assistance  
In the event of an Emergency  Security Situation , Intl.SOS will use reasonable commercial efforts 
to arrange for the evacuation of Covered Ind ividual s to the nearest safe and acceptable location.  
Intl.SOS shall endeavor on a reasonable commercial effort basis to provide recommendations and 
advice as a crisis is developing, to help the Subscriber to limit their exposure in the affected 
location(s ). Recommendations could include advice to restrict travel of Covered Individual s to 
affected location(s), and advice to reduce the number of Covered Individual s in the affected 
location(s) making best use of scheduled commercial transport services.  
Evacu ation services will be provided from an international port of departure designated by Intl.SOS 
security Personnel .  The Subscriber will be responsible for the cost and arrangements of ground 
transportation for Covered Individual s to the designated port of departure designated by Intl.SOS.  
Evacuation decisions will be made by Intl.SOS’ security Personnel , in consultation with interested 
governments, security analysts, the Subscriber and the Authorized Person. Intl.SOS will act at the 
request of the Subscribe r if the Subscriber makes the decision to evacuate. Intl.SOS will use all 
reasonable commercial efforts to use transport provided by scheduled airlines.  However, Intl.SOS 
may, at its sole discretion, utilize other available resources to accomplish the eva cuation including 
private aircraft, helicopter, railway, ground and water transportation, in which event the point of 
departure may vary.  
In the event that evacuation becomes impractical or dangerous, Intl.SOS will use all reasonable 
commercial efforts to maintain contact with Covered Individual s until an evacuation becomes 
practical or the emergency has ended.  
Intl.SOS will arrange for evacuation promptly after the decision to evacuate is made.  Intl.SOS will 
use all reasonable commercial efforts to make s uch arrangements available for not less than five 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC38 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  (5) days.  However, the commencement and duration of such arrangements will be determined by 
Intl.SOS in consultation with the Subscriber, based on the nature of the emergency and other 
circumstances.  
4. TRAVEL SECURITY MANAGEMENT SERVICES  
Travel Security Management Services shall be provided by Intl.SOS upon request of the Subscriber 
who shall contact Intl.SOS .  This service is available to the Subscriber solely as a single bundled 
service and solely as additional services to those set out in the Security Assistance Services section 
above . 
a.   Direct Access  
Intl.SOS will provide the Nominated Manager with dire ct access through a direct line to security 
specialists in a Regional Security Centre (s) of the Subscriber’s choice.  
“Nominated Manager” shall mean an individual(s) nominated by the Authorized Person. The 
Subscription Fee includes up to five (5) Nominate d Managers. The Subscriber shall pay additional 
fees which shall be displayed on the Certificate of Subscription when they declare more than five 
(5) Nominated Managers.  
“Regional Security Centre” shall mean an Assistance Centre with a dedicated specialis t security 
team.  
b.   Customized Operations Procedures  
Intl.SOS will, in consultation with the Subscriber, establish protocols that can include Subscriber 
specific call handling and case management protocols . 
c.   Information & Analysis  
Intl.SOS will provi de the following additional perspective and analysis:  
i. Insight  - regular written briefings covering forecasts, trends and the implications of 
incidents that affect travel security. This includes significant travel security issues in a 
region (such as ele vated or emerging changes in the risk environment of a country), analysis 
of developing trends within a region and advice in advance of key events to assist the 
Subscriber in preparing for potential changes in security, and a Monthly Security Forecast 
identifying issues in the coming month which might impact travel programs.  
ii. Evacuation Monitor  - provides evacuation planning, guidance through a country -level 
evacuation risk summary, the current evacuation planning recommendation and indicators 
of deterio ration, and related updates, highlighting recent changes.  
d. Notification  
Intl.SOS will notify the Nominated Manager(s) in the event of Special Advisory in a country 
designated by the Subscriber.   This will be done by email and SMS.    
A “Special Advisory”  provides an urgent alert for situations or events that pose an imminent threat 
to life or limb, or require an immediate change to current travel or movement plans, and which in 
the judgment of Intl.SOS require organisations to account for their staff to c onfirm exposure and 
any assistance requirements.  This includes but is not limited to: protests, religious or sectarian 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC39 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  unrest; violent crime; terrorist attacks; natural disasters and environmental hazards; significant 
disruption to transport infrastructur e affecting national or international movements; war/conflict.   
Notification will also be done by text to speech for Special Advisories that are Significant Events.   
A “Significant Event” shall mean an event or incident which has resulted in a Special Advisory, 
but which, in the judgment of the regional security centre, requires additional assurance of 
notification. This includes an event which has the capacity to adve rsely affect a Subscriber’s 
operations or Personnel in a given location and which necessitates (i) an urgent need to account for 
Personnel on the ground; (ii) a change in the security position being adopted by corporate 
management or their employees; or (i ii) a change in travel precautions due to a potential or actual 
deterioration in the security environment affecting business travelers or the expatriate business 
community.  
 
5. CONFIGURABLE COMMUNICATIONS PORTAL  
Intl.SOS  shall establish and host a Communications Portal for the Subscriber (the 
“Communications Portal”).   The Communications Portal shall include use of the Subscriber’s logo, 
Intl.SOS Proprietary Items, and Subscriber Material, using a standard template.   The 
Communications Portal Web -site will also include:  
a. Printable membership cards of a design agreed by the Subscriber and Intl.SOS;  
b. A description of Intl.SOS services and benefits available under the Subscriber’s Program;  
c. Access to destination guides and alert s;  
d. Details of how to contact Intl.SOS Assistance Centers and clinics;  
e. Access to a password protected self -service website allowing Subscriber to create, publish and 
archive additional country or worldwide messages within their Communications Portal.  
f. Other  Subscriber Material relating to the Subscriber’s Program, as supplied to Intl.SOS by 
Subscriber in a suitable electronic format.  
6. TRAVELTRACKER  
a. Intl.SOS will establish and host a password protected Internet Web -site containing the travel 
itinerary data of Covered Individual s provided by Subscriber (the “TravelTracker Web -site”). 
The TravelTracker Web -site will incorporate a search mechanism that will allow an Authorized 
Person to search the data based on a Covered Individual ’s name, dates of travel and dest ination 
country. TravelTracker will be populated with travel itineraries from Data Feeds or using direct 
manual entry by authorized Covered Individual s or using direct entry when authorized. The 
Subscriber shall pay Intl.SOS a one -time implementation fee o f US$1,000 per Data Feed.  Such 
fees shall be invoiced and shall by paid by Subscriber before Intl.SOS commences work.  
b. The Data Feeds will be consistent with industry recognized  data formats with Covered 
Individual  details populated in designated fields.  Intl.SOS will capture itinerary details, as well 
as traveler contact details, if populated by Subscriber in the fields designated by Intl.SOS.  
Travelers’ travel itineraries may include the Subscriber’s unique identification number (if any), 
name and email address (if any) , travel data, including an employee ID (if any), flight 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC40 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  information (such as the flight number, date and time) departure and arrival airports 
(such as the airport code, city and country) and where accessible through a standard 
format, the hotel and car rental information . Itineraries  that are incomplete or incorrectly 
formatted will not be processed and Intl.SOS shall not be held responsible for not processing 
such itineraries . Subscriber will be responsible for providing Data Feeds (where taken) and the 
timely, accurate and complete delivery of the Travelers’ travel itineraries.  
c. Standard reports in TravelTracker shall be provided to the Subscriber, which shall include: 
‘Traveler by Risk Rating’ report, ‘Multiple Travelers’ report and ‘Trave l Advisory’ report.  The 
inventory of standard reports included in TravelTracker may change from time to time.  
d. Any customized reports requested by the Subscriber shall be charged based on how much effort 
is required according to the level of customization required by the Subscriber. The Subscriber 
and Intl.SOS shall mutually agree on the fee required prior to any commencement of work.  
e. Intl.SOS shall store and maintain the Covered Individual ’s data and shall secure the traveler 
entry database by using indust ry standard technical and procedural access controls and 
information technology security systems.  The Covered Individual ’s Personal Information  shall 
be made accessible to Intl.SOS to the extent necessary for  Intl.SOS to provide the Travel 
Tracker to Sub scriber.  
f. The Subscriber shall ensure that the Covered Individual  has authorized Intl.SOS to receive 
member specific data from, including but not limited to third parties such as travel service 
providers.  Such third party providers may include others invol ved in the coordination of the 
Covered Individual ’s travel and other needs, to the extent necessary for Intl.SOS to provide the 
Subscriber’s Program.  Subscribers shall be solely responsible for the completeness, timeliness 
and accuracy of such data.  Intl .SOS shall not be responsible for the Covered Individual ’s or 
Subscriber’s delays in providing the data or for incomplete or inaccurate data.  
g. Intl.SOS shall automatically send an email to the Covered Individual  before a Covered 
Individual  takes a trip to a  qualified destination based on the travel itinerary provided by 
Subscriber on the TravelTracker Web -site.  The criteria for qualifying destinations will be 
determined by the Subscriber based on risk ratings and business rules provided to Intl.SOS by 
the S ubscriber and maintained in the TravelTracker Web -site by Intl.SOS.  
h. This pre -trip advisory email shall include use of the Subscriber’s logo, Intl.SOS  Proprietary 
Items, and Subscriber Material and the email will be in a single language and shall be consistent 
with a standard template for that single language for the TravelTracker Web -site. In the event 
that software development is required by Subscribe r to accommodate changes to the standard 
template, Subscriber shall pay additional fees as agreed between Intl.SOS and Subscriber.   
i. An Authorized Person may include and maintain certain country specific data through the 
TravelTracker Web -site that will be  included in the pre -trip emails.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC41 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  j. The number of Covered Individual s covered under TravelTracker is displayed on the 
Certificate of Subscription.  
7. EXCEPTIONS  
7.1. The following treatment, items, conditions, activities and their related or consequential 
expenses are excluded from Sections 1 and 2 unless Intl.SOS has given its prior written 
approval and the Subscriber has paid the designated fees:  
a. Any expense incurred  as a result of a Pre -existing Condition.  
b. More than one emergency evacuation and/or repatriation for any single medical condition of a 
Covered Individual  during the Term.  
c. Any cost or expense not expressly covered by the Membership and not approved in adva nce 
and in writing by Intl.SOS and/or not arranged by Intl.SOS.  This exception shall not apply to 
emergency medical evacuation from remote or primitive areas when Intl.SOS cannot be 
contacted in advance and delay might reasonably be expected in loss of li fe or harm to the 
Covered Individual .  
d. Any event occurring when the Expatriate is within the territory of his/her Home Country or 
when the Traveler is within the territory of his/her Home Country or Country of Assignment.  
e. Any expense incurred for Covered I ndividual s who are Travelers or Expatriates, contrary to 
the advice of a medical practitioner, or for the purpose of obtaining medical treatment or for 
rest and recuperation following any prior accident, illness or Pre -existing Condition.  
f. Any expense incu rred for medical evacuation or repatriation if the Covered Individual  is not 
suffering from a Serious Medical Condition, and/or in the opinion of the Intl.SOS physician, 
the Covered Individual  can be adequately treated locally, or treatment can be reasonab ly 
delayed until the Covered Individual  returns to his/her Home Country or Country of 
Assignment.  
g. Any expense incurred for medical evacuation or repatriation where the Covered Individual , in 
the opinion of the Intl.SOS physician, can travel as an ordinary  passenger without a medical 
escort.  
h. Any treatment or expense incurred related to childbirth, miscarriage or pregnancy.  This 
exception shall not apply to any abnormal pregnancy or vital complication of pregnancy which 
endangers the life of the mother and /or unborn child during the first twenty -four (24) weeks of 
pregnancy.   
i. Any expense incurred related to accident or injury occurring while the Covered Individual  is 
engaged in any high risk occupation or unusual risk generally, including hazardous activit y, 
pastime or pursuit, caving, mountaineering or rock climbing necessitating the use of guides or 
ropes, potholing, skydiving, parachuting, bungee -jumping, ballooning, hang gliding, deep sea 
diving utilizing hard helmet with air hose attachments, martial a rts, rallying, racing of any kind 
other than on foot, and any organized sports undertaken on a professional or sponsored basis.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC42 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  j. Any expense incurred for emotional, mental or psychiatric illness.  
k. Any expense incurred as a result of a self -inflicted injury , suicide, drug addiction or abuse, 
alcohol abuse, or sexually transmitted diseases.  
l. Any expense incurred as a result of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) or any 
AIDS related condition or disease.  
m. Any expense related to the Covered Individual  engaging in any form of aerial flight except as 
a passenger on a scheduled airline flight; as a passenger on a licensed charter fixed wing aircraft 
over an established route; or as a passenger traveling on a business related activity in a fixed 
wing aircraft  owned or leased to the Subscriber.  
n. Any expense related to the Covered Individual  engaging in the commission of, or the attempt 
to commit, an unlawful act.  
o. Any expense related to treatment performed or ordered by a non -registered practitioner not in 
accordance with the standard medical practice as defined in the country of treatment.  
p. Any expense incurred as a result of the Covered Individual  engaging in active service in the 
armed forces or police of any nation; active participation in war (whether de clared or not), 
invasion, act of foreign enemy, hostilities, civil war, rebellion, riot, revolution or insurrection.  
q. Any expense incurred which is a direct result or indirect result of nuclear reaction or radiation.  
r. Any expense incurred for or as a result of any activity required from or on a ship or oil -rig 
platform, or at a similar off -shore location.  
s. Any expense incurred, regardless of any contributory cause(s), involving the use of or release 
or the threat thereof of any nuclear weapon or device or che mical or biological agent.  
t. Any expense incurred as a result of an incident where the Covered Individual  is in a specific 
country and the Subscriber has not paid the applicable l Subscription Fee due.  
7.2 Intl.SOS, at its sole discretion, will assist Covered Individual s on a fee -for-service basis for 
Interventions falling under the above Exceptions, subject to prior written approval of an 
Authorized Person.  Intl.SOS reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to request additional 
financial guarantees  or indemnification from the Subscriber and/or its Covered Individual (s) 
prior to rendering such services on a fee -for-service basis.  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC43 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  ANNEX 1 TO SCHEDULE B - SCHEDULE OF FEES   
 
 
This schedule of fees is attached to and forms part of the terms and conditions.  
 
The following is a list of Services the Subscriber, Covered Personnel or Authorized Person may request the 
Vendor  to deliver; respective fees are for reference only. In the event that the Subscriber, Covered Personnel 
or Authorized Person proc ures any specific Service, the applicable fee will be negotiated and agreed upon 
in writing by both parties at the time of procurement.   
1. MEDICAL EVACUATION,  REPATRIATION AND REPATRIATION OF MORTAL 
REMAINS  
1.1 By air ambulance  Service  
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of a Covered Personnel , by chartering a pre -configured air 
ambulance aircraft from Vendor  accredited aviation service provider, including Air Rescue International a 
Medical Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to se rvice providers will be charged to the 
Subscriber. The airport -to-airport quotation from the aviation service provider includes aircraft and medical 
team costs but excludes any other service provider charges, which may be applied and will be billed to the 
Subscriber at cost.  
1.2 By air charter  Service  
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of a Covered Personnel , by chartering an aircraft made suitable 
for patient transportation, by the provision of portable medical equipment and medical staff from Vendor .  
i. Medical Escort Fee inclusive of portable medical equipment (refer to Table 1)  
ii. Medical Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, not inclusive of 
Medical Escort Fees, will be charged to the Subscriber.  
1.3 By scheduled airline  Servi ce 
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of a Covered Personnel , on commercial aircraft or scheduled 
airline, made suitable for patient transportation by the provision of portable medical equipment and medical 
staff from Vendor .  
i. Medical Escort Fee inc lusive of portable medical equipment (refer to Table 1)  
ii. Medical Coordination Fee (refer to Table 2)  
iii. Where applicable,  Ground Handling Fee(s) will be applied  (refer to Table 3)  
1.4 Other modes of surface transportation – ground or maritime  Service  
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of a Covered Personnel , by road ambulance, train, boat, ferry, 
or other means of surface or maritime transportation, made suitable for patient transfer by the provision of 
portable medical equipment and medical staff from Vendor .  
i. Medical Escort Fee inclusive of portable medical equipment (refer to Table 1)  
ii. Medical Coordination Fee of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, not inclusive of 
Medical Escort Fees, down to a minimum of USD180, will be charged to the Subscriber.  
 
1.5. REPATRIATION OF MORTAL REMAINS   
1.5.1 Repatriation of Mortal Remains  Service  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC44 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Where Vendor  organizes the repatriation of a deceased Covered Personnel’s  mortal remains, from the 
place of death to the Covered Personnel’s  home country.  
i. Repa triation of Mortal Remains Coordination Fee of USD 2,205 will be charged to the 
Subscriber, in addition to the costs charged by the service provider(s).  
ii. Vendor  staff may be deployed on a case by case basis. The applicable fees will be agreed with the 
Subs criber prior to deployment.  
 
The Fees under this Section 1 shall not be charged directly to Subscriber.  
 
2. LOCAL FUNERAL SERVICE  
2.1 Local Funeral Services  
Where Vendor  arranges for a local burial or cremation at the Covered Personnel’s  place of death, when 
permitted by applicable laws and procedures and if the service is available and practicable.  
i. Local Funeral Services Coordination Fee of USD 2,205 will be charged to the Subscriber, in 
addition to the costs charged by the service provider(s).  
ii. Vendor  staff may be deployed on a case by case basis. The applicable fees will be agreed with the 
Subscriber prior to deployment.  
Where services described in 2.1 and 2.2 are provided in conjunction for the same deceased Covered 
Personnel , only the Repatriation of Mortal Remains Coordination Fee described above applies.   
 
3. MONITORING OF MEDICAL CARE, MEDICAL EXPENSE GUARANTEE AND 
PAYMENT  
 
3.1 Outpatient care Service  
An outpatient is defined as a patient who receives medical services whether face -to-face in a clinical setting 
or via phone/ video -based Teleconsultation and is not admitted as an inpatient by the treating physician.  
Outpatient treatment commences the day  of the first appointment with a treating medical practitioner.  The 
last outpatient day is the day of the last appointment for the same episode of care. Where Vendor  monitors 
the progress of outpatient medical care provided to a  Covered Personnel by a med ical practitioner and/ or 
guarantees and pays service provider costs associated with a  Covered Personnel’s  outpatient medical care, 
an Outpatient Service Fee will be charged to the Subscriber, as follows:   
Treatment Duration  Outpatient Service Fee  
Up to 14 days  USD 220 per case*  
Additional days above 14 and up to 60 consecutive 
days  An additional fee of USD 150 per case will be 
charged  
61 consecutive days and over  Quote provided on a case by case basis  
*Outpatient Service Fee of USD 220 is a flat fee c harged regardless of whether the patient has outpatient 
treatment once in 14 days or 14 visits in 14 days.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC45 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  3.2 Inpatient care  Service  
An inpatient is defined as a patient who receives medical services at a medical facility and the treating 
physician has w ritten an order to admit him/ her as an inpatient.  A patient is an inpatient starting the day 
he/she is formally admitted to a medical facility. The last inpatient day is the day before the patient is 
discharged. An Inpatient Service Fee will be charged, as follows, where Vendor  monitors the progress of 
inpatient medical care provided to a Covered Personnel  at a medical facility and/or guarantees and pays 
service provider costs associated with a Covered Personnel’s  inpatient medical care:  
Treatment Duration  Inpatient Service Fee  
First 14 days  USD 270 per day  
Additional days above 14 and up to 60 days  USD 120 per day  
61 consecutive days and over  Quote provided on a case by case 
basis  
 
4. RE-PRICING AND DISCOUNTS  
Where Vendor  secures a discount:  
i. in United States of America, result ing from a process of re -pricing negotiation s with preferred 
provider organization (PPO) networks, Vendor  shall pass on 65% of such negotiated discounts to 
the Subscriber; or  
ii. on behalf of the Subscriber, Vendor  shall pass  on 65% of such negotiated discounts to the 
Subscriber.  
 
5. DISPATCH OF MEDICATION AND MEDICAL SUPPLIES  
Where Vendor  arranges for the delivery of medicines, drugs and medical supplies which are not available 
at or near the Covered Personnel  location, and w here practical and legally permissible, a Coordination Fee  
of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, or a minimum of USD  180, whichever is greater, will 
be charged to the Subscriber.  
 
6. HEALTH CONSULTING – optional Services  
Where Vendor  health consultants may be requested by the Subscriber. In the event that such optional 
Service is requested a written confirmation is needed from the Subscriber.  
Health Consultant    Daily fee  
C-Suite Health Advisor  USD 4,200*  
Senior Health Consultant  USD 3,500  
Health Consultant (National Medical Director)  USD 2,650  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC46 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Health Program Manager  USD 1,800  
*Note: C -Suite Health Advisor rate can only apply for the provision of Senior Health Advisors for special 
engagements exclusively managed by practices which may be subject to special conditions.  
Health Consulting fees do not include the following ancillary costs which may be applied and billed to the 
Subscriber at cost:  
 Transport costs   Hotel costs   Production of a report/material where 
applicable   
 Travel time for consultants is billable at 75% of the daily rate per travel day per consultant, calculated 
on a pro rata basis to the half day (when less than 4 hours).  This is calculated based on an 8-hour working 
day. 
 
7. OTHER SERVICES EXCEPT FOR ITEMS 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 ABOVE  
Where Vendor  arranges for the delivery of other assistance services, not listed in items 1, 2, 3 , 4, 5 and 6 
above, a Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, or a mini mum of USD180, 
whichever is greater, will be charged to the Subscriber.  In the event that other assistance Service(s) is 
requested a written confirmation is needed from the Subscriber.  
8. TABLES (Medical)  
 
Table 1 – Medical Escort Fees (Daily rates)  
The Medi cal Escort Fees are based on the type of medical escort personnel and equipment required, and 
are charged in half -day increments , starting  with a minimum of one day (24 hrs). Vendor  reserves the right 
to select a medical team befitting the real time clinic al status and medical condition of the patient.  A written 
Medical Escort plan including recommended medical personnel and associated Fees from Vendor  will be 
sent to the Subscriber for approval.  
The below Medical Escort Fees are inclusive of the followin g:  
 Medical escort crew charges    Relevant insurance provisions.   
 Drugs, disposables, portable medical equipment and surgical sundries required during the 
transportation  
 
Medical Team originating 
from:  Asia  Americas, Europe, Middle 
East  Australasia Africa, 
CIS 
Specialist/Anaesthetist  USD 
4,710  USD 7,460  USD 4,890  
General Practitioner  USD 
3,260  USD 7,160  USD 4,190  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC47 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  ICU Nurse  USD 
1,805  USD 4,775  USD 2,500  
Nurse  USD 
1,630  USD 4,305  USD 2,335  
 
Medical Escort Fees do not include the following ancillary costs which may be applied and billed to the 
Subscriber at cost:  
 Additional / non -standard equipment / crew 
required    Transport costs  
 Room and board for patient, medical escort team and accompanying person(s)  
 
Table 2 – Medical Coordination Fee for medical evacuations and repatriations by scheduled airline  
The Medical Coordination Fee is based on the patient’s total flight time, excluding layover time, as detailed 
on the patient’s airline ticket and itinerary.  
 
Flight Time (excluding layover  time)  Seated 
patients  Stretcher patients  
Totalling 2 hours and below  USD  290  USD  875  
Totalling over 2 hours and 6 hours or 
less USD  875  USD  1,740  
Totalling over 6 hours and 10 hours or 
less USD  1,455  USD  2,620  
Totalling above 10 hours  USD  2,035  USD  3,495  
 
Table 3 – Ground Handling Fees  
The ground handling support includes the facilitation of on the ground administration, logistics or 
operational support. This support may include:  
■ Immigration and customs clearance 
assistance   ■ Wheelchair assistance at points of arrival/ departure  
■ Meeting service at points of 
arrival/departure   ■ Check -in/Departure assistance / Tarmac access 
application  
Where ground handling support is rendered by:  
(a) a service provider, the service provider expenses will be charged at cost.  
(b) Vendor  personnel, a Ground Handling Fee will be charged to the Subscriber, in accordance with the 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC48 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  table below:  
Americas, Europe, Middle 
East  Asia, Australasia, Africa, 
CIS 
USD 1,630  USD1,110  
 
9. SECURITY EVACUATION AND REPATRIATION BY AIR  
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of one or more Covered Personnel , by chartering a suitable 
means of air transportation for evacuation purposes:  
i. Security Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, not inclusive of 
Security Escort Fees and Ground Handling fees, will be charged to the Subscriber.  
ii. Where applicable,  Security Escort Fee inclusive of crisis management equipment (refer to Table 
1) 
iii. Wher e applicable,  Ground Handling Fee(s) will be applied  (refer to Table 2)  
 
10. SECURITY ARRANGEMENT  SERVICES  
Where Vendor  organises arrangements or the journey of  one or more Covered Personnel  and activates 
accredited service providers to provide a service or a combination of services presented in this section. The 
delivery of these services is subject to the approval of the relevant Regional Security Centre and would 
depend on the presence of an accredited service provider at the desired location and the necessary lead time 
ahead of the mission to arrange the services.  
10.1. Surface transportation – ground or maritime  
Where Vendor  organizes the transportation of one or more Covered Personnel , by road , train, boat, ferry, 
or other means of surface or maritime transportation by activating accredited service providers a Security 
Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to accredited service providers, or USD 180 per task, 
whichever is higher, will  be charged to the Subscriber.  
 
10.2. Meet & Greet  
Where Vendor  provides meet and greet services to support a Covered Personnel  by activating accredited 
service providers, a Security  Coordination Fee of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers or USD 
180 per task, whichever is higher will be charged to the Subscriber.  
10.3. Executive Protection  
Where Vendor  provides Executive protection services exclusively through accredited specialised security 
providers a Security Coordination  Fee of 15% of total costs paid  to service provider will be charged to the 
Subscriber.  
 
11. SECURITY CONSULTING – optional services  
Where Vendor  security consultants may be requested by the Subscriber. In the event that such optional 
service is requested a written confirmation is needed from the Subscriber.  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC49 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Security Consultant    Daily fee  
C-Suite Security Advisor  USD 3,500  
Principal Security Consultant  USD 2,700  
Security Consultant  USD 2,000  
Security Consulting fees do not include the following ancillary costs which may be applied and billed to the 
Subscriber at cost:  
 Transport costs   Hotel costs   Production of a report/material where 
applicable   
 Travel time for consultants is billable at 75% of the daily rate per travel day per consultant, calculated 
on a pro rata basis to the half day (when less than 4 hours).  This is calculated based on an 8-hour working 
day. 
 
12. OTHER SERVICES EXCEPT FOR ITEMS 9, 10 and 11 ABOVE  
Where Vendor  arranges for the delivery of security assistance services and/or ground tasks, not listed in 
items 9, 10  and 11 above, a Coordination Fee  of 15% of the total costs paid to service providers, or a 
minimum of USD  180, whichever is greater, will be charged to the Subscriber.  Service provider expenses 
incurred on behalf of the Subscriber are supported by an invoice, receipt or voucher and recharged at cost.  
13. TABLES (Security)  
Table 1 – Security Escort Fees (Daily rates)  
The Security Escort Fees are charged in half -day increments , starting  with a minimum of one day (24 hrs). 
Vendor  reserves the right to select individuals or a team befitting the real time crisis situational status  
together with language and cultural considerations relating to the  Covered Personnel  and the country of 
incident. A written Security Escort plan including recommended security personnel and associated Fees 
from Intl. SOS will be sent to the Subscriber for  approval.  
Security Escort Fees are inclusive of the following:  
 Relevant insurance provisions    Security escort charges   
 Crisis management equipment including, but not limited to, passport scanners, satellite 
phones, other communication means and any other  sundries costs required during the 
transportation  
Security Escorts  per Day per Person    
Senior Security Consultant  USD 2,700  
Security Consultant  USD 2,000  
Operations/Security Coordinator  USD 1,500  
Security Escort Fees do not include the following ancillary costs which may be applied and billed to the 
Subscriber at cost:  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC50 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc   Additional / non -standard equipment / crew 
required    Transport costs  
 Room and board for patient, security escort team and accompanying person(s)  
Table 2 – Ground Handling Fees  
The ground handling support includes the facilitation of on the ground administration, logistics or 
operational support. This support may include:  
■ Immigration and customs clearance 
assistance   ■ Wheelchair assistance at points of arrival/ departure  
■ Meeting service at points of 
arrival/departure   ■ Check -in/Departure assistance / Tarmac access 
application  
Where ground handling support is rendered by:  
(a) a service provider, the service provider expenses will be charged at cost.  
(b) Vendor  personnel, a Ground Handling Fee will be charged to the Subscriber, in accordance with the 
table below:  
 Americas, Europe, Middle East  Africa, Asia, Australasia and 
CIS 
USD 1,630  USD 1,110  
 
 
14. NOTES ON FEES  
14.1 Service provider expenses incurred on behalf of the Subscriber will supported by an invoice, 
receipt or voucher and recharged at cost.  
14.2 Intl.SOS reserves the right to revise this Schedule of Fees no more than once per year with ninety 
(90) days prior written notice.  For the avoidance of doubt, the Schedu le of Fees shall not vary any 
fees subject to Schedule A – Discount Schedule.  
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC51 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE C  
ONLINE /TELEPHONE  SERVICES - SERVICE LEVELS  AND SUPPORT SCHEDULE  
 
1.0 SER VICE LEVEL  AGREEM ENT. The Service Levels and Support Schedule  sets 
forth the service level agreements (“SLAs”) agreed  upon by the Parties with respect to the 
Services. The Parties hereby acknowledge and agree that the  terms and conditions set forth 
in the Service Levels and Support Schedule  shall apply throug hout the Term. These service 
levels will be reviewed, and as mutually agreed to by the Parties, may be amended as needed  
on a regul ar basis throu ghout the Term, but not less frequently than annually. 
 
2.0  OPERATIONAL and PERF ORMANCE SLAs. 
 
 
Cate gory  
Metric  
Summary  
Measurement  
Measured By 
  
Notification of Reque st to 
Implement New Service 
Provider or Coun try to 
Vendor  progr am  
All requests for new 
implementations must be 
communicated to the Program 
Administrator upon receipt of 
reque st 
 
 
Upon receipt of confirmation 
from Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator to  proceed 
with  
 
Within 2 business 
days of receipt of 
reque st  
 
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
 
 
Data  
Implementation Lead 
Assignment implementation, Vendor  will 
assign  a primary point of 
contact who will work with  
both the travel agen cy contact, 
and Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator to implement 
data feeds  
Within 1 business 
day of receipt of 
reque st  
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
  
 
Successful Implementation 
of Data Feed  
 
Coord ination with agen cy and 
testing of new data feed will 
be fully completed  
Completed within 7 
days following 
receipt of all 
required travel 
agen cy information  
 
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC52 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc    
 
 
 
Access to TravelTracker 
(TT)  
Vendor  will grant access to TT 
once appro val has been given 
by Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator. Subscriber will 
send reque st to both Service 
Delivery Manage r and Online 
Helpdesk to be considered for 
SLA 
 
 
 
Travel Tracker will be available 
99.5% of the time   
 
 
 
Within 1 business 
day of receipt of 
reque st 
 
 
 
 
 
99.5% of the time  
 
 
 
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
Site 
Maintenance System Availability 
(Site-up Time) 24/7 
 
Unplanned system recovery 
shall occur  within 4 hours 24/7; Unplanned 
targeted restoration 
is 2 hours.  
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
  
 
 
Load ing new/upda ting all 
Physical Assets into 
TravelTracker (TT)  
Vendor  will process and 
upda te all Physical Assets 
submitted throug h the SFTP 
portal, using the appro ved 
Vendor  standar d 
template/format, and provide 
an indication of locations that 
are unab le to be geo-coded in  
Initial coding will be 
completed within 3 
business days of 
receipt of reque st. 
Follo w-up coding 
will be completed 
within 3 business  
 
 
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
 
 
Cate gory  
Metric  
Summary  
Measurement  
Measured By 
 the TravelTracker interface. 
Subscriber will attempt to 
collect additional geo-code 
locations for offices which 
canno t be aligned and 
provide to  Vendor to  
complete geo-coding process days of receiving 
Subscriber 
response.  
  
 
Acknowledgement Message 
 
 
 
 
Access to Customer S ervice 
Executive (CSE) 
 
 
 
 
Call Abando nment  
Subscriber c aller will be 
greeted by pre-recorded 
message when c alling 
assistance center 
 
 
Calls will be answered by a 
LIVE CSE 
 
 
 
 
 
% of calls that disconne ct 
before speaking with a live 
CSE   
No more than 3 
rings 
 
 
 
90% of calls within 
10 seconds of 
hearing the 
acknowledgement 
message 
 
 
 
<3% of all calls  
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
 
 
 
 
 
Quarterly SLA Repor ting 
 
 
 
 
 
Quarterly SLA repor ting 
     
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC53 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc       
  
 
 
Notification of Case (NOC)  
Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator will be notified  
of all reque sts to in itiate a 
case following c aller contact  
Sugge st 95% within 
48 hours from 
receipt of patient 
consent Quarterly SLA repor ting 
Measurement will be a 
sample of 40% of cases 
per quarter 
Assistance 
Center  
 
Notification of critical, life 
threatening or ‘code blue’ 
cases  
Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator will be notified  
of all reque sts to in itiate a 
case following c aller contact  
Progra m 
Administrator will 
receive verbiage 
notification within 3- 
4 hours  
 
Quarterly SLA repor ting 
this SLA will be reviewed 
at 6 month intervals 
 
  
 
 
 
Provider recommendations 
to callers with non-emergen t 
cases  
 
 
CSE will call/email all 
provider recommenda tions to 
Subscriber employees 
seeking 
non-emergen t assistance  
Vendor will provide 
a recommenda tion 
and referral to 
Subscriber 
members within 2-4 
hours of the first 
contact unless 
otherwise agree d 
with the member  
 
Quarterly SLA repor ting 
Measurement will be a 
sample of 40% of cases 
per quarter 
  
 
 
Response to email reque sts 
for information by travelers  
CSE will respond to all 
inquiries seeking additional 
information relative to 
medical and/or security 
concerns related to company 
travel  
Acknowledge email 
within 2 hours of 
receipt, case to be 
closed within 
timeline committed 
to reque stor  
 
Quarterly SLA repor ting 
this SLA will be reviewed 
at 6 month intervals 
 
 
 
Cate gory   
Metric  
Summary  
Measurement  
Measured By 
  
 
Business Reviews 
 
 
 
 
 
Email Acknowledgement  
Vendor  will condu ct 
detailed business reviews 
with Subscriber  
 
 
 
 
Customer Service Manager 
(CSM)  will acknowledge 
receipt of all Subscriber 
Program Administrator emails 
and provide ETA  for 
resolution   
Within 45 days 
following the end of 
each quarter 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
email will be sent 
within 24 hours of 
receipt 
 
 
 
  
 
Client Feedback 
 
 
 
Client Feedback 
 
this SLA will be reviewed 
at 6 month intervals 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC54 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Account 
Management  
 
 
 
 
Notification of 
CSM/Assistant 
Manager (AM ) 
Absence  
 
CSM will be required to 
provide Subscriber  with 
advance notice of all 
schedu led work absences 
and/or business travel. 
Vendor  will be required to 
provide a  secondar y contact 
or back-up during the period 
of the schedu led absence  
 
No less than 2 
weeks before start of 
absence or as soon 
as business travel is 
planned , whichever 
is later 
 
During an unplanned 
absence, the 
designated back-up 
should be available  
 
 
 
 
 
Activity Tracker 
  
 
Meetings   
Regu larly schedu led meeting 
with CSM will be held to 
review Activity Tracker and 
any other open activities  
 
Weekly  
 
Quarterly SLA Repor t 
  
 
 
 
Activity Tracker  
 
CSM will create an active log 
of all open issues and will 
review with Subscriber 
Progra m Administrator.  
Tracker will be 
upda ted and 
distributed to 
Subscriber no more 
than 48 hours after 
the weekly meeting 
has been 
condu cted  
 
 
 
Activity Tracker 
  
 
 
Client Service Director  
All communications from 
Subscriber P rogra m 
Administrator will be 
acknowledged and will include 
an ETA for closure of the 
reque st  
 
Within 1 business 
day of receipt of 
reque st  
Client Feedback and 
Activity Tracker (Reque st 
will be cc: the AM so that 
it can be adde d to the 
tracker) 
 
3.0     FAILURE TO MEET SLAs.     In the event Vendor  does not meet an SLA for a 
given quarter, the  Vendor’s  Client Manage ment Services team will meet with the 
Subscriber’s Progr am Administrator to re view root cause for any major issues, including, 
where applicable,  providing details on any efforts  related to prevent future occurrences of a 
particular problem. In the event any performance is suspected or dee med to be 
unacceptable, Vendor  as noted, shall research the cause, with the Subscriber’s reasonable 
assistance, and will correct (where Vendor  is responsible) or recommend corrective action 
(where the Subscriber is responsible). 
 
Commencing on the third calendar  month after commencement of the initial Term and 
extendi ng throu ghout the Term Vendor  agrees that it shall meet or discuss, during any 
calendar month, the KPIs listed in Section 2.0 for  perfo rmance of all SLAs. 
 
Not later than fifteen (15) business days after the end of each quarter,  Vendor  shall provide 
Subscriber with a report  stating the number of KPIs  successfully achieved by Vendor  in 
the prior quarter and the amount of any applicable credit. If the Subscriber does not dispute 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC55 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  such report in writing within ten (10) bu siness days of receipt of such repor t, the report  will 
be deemed accepted by the Subscriber. Any credits due  to the Subscriber shall be applied 
to any fees Subscriber incurs on an annual basis, relative to follo wing renewal/term. 
 
Vendor KPIs Su ccess fully 
Achieved 
 
(Measured on  a quarter ly basis)  Credit to Sub scriber  
16 0.125% of annual  fee 
 
14  
0.25% of annual  fee 
 
12  
0.375 % of annual  fee 
 
10 or fewer  
0.5% of annual  fee 
 
 
In the event that Vendor  completes fewer than ten (10) KPIs successfully for a period exceeding 
three (3)m onths, the Subscriber may, terminate this Agreement by providing written  notice to 
Vendor  not later than thirty  (30) days after the last day of the month in which Vendor  completed 
fewer than  ten (10) KP Is successfully. 
 
4.0 REP ORTING  OF SLA’s. In accordance with Section 3.0 above, Vendor will provide reports 
to Subscriber by the fifteenth (15th) business day of each month following the end of the quarter with 
the results of the previous quarter's performance. Vendor  agrees to provide, together with each 
quarter’s perfo rmance reports: (a) Vendor’s  certification that the SLAs  provided in such report (s) 
are true, accurate and  complete to the best of Vendor’s  knowledge, and (b) when  the SLAs have 
not been  met, updates on any root cause analysis or remedial efforts, if any, being taken by 
Vendor.  The Parties shall jointly review the SLA  reports for the previous month at the monthly 
status meetings. The Subscriber reserves the r ight to audit or validate all repor ts in conjunction 
with Vendor.  
 
5.0 AVAILABILITY.  The Services shall be fully operational and Available to the Subscriber 
three  hundred sixty-five (365)  days per year, twenty-four ( 24) hours per day. As used herein, 
"Available" means that the Sub scriber  will be able to access the Services and the functionality 
of the applications and retrieve and input  data as set forth herein. Sche duled downtime of the 
applications and Services for maintenance purp oses will be coordinated in advance with the 
Subscriber's consent, which shall not be unre asonably withheld.  Vendor  shall notify the 
Subscriber at least seven (7) business days in advance of any scheduled do wntime or system 
change  that will affect the Services; all scheduled maintenance shall be outside of nor mal 
business hours. As used herein, "do wntime" means any period of t ime during which the Ser vices 
are not  available to the Subscriber. 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC56 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc   
6.0 DISASTER  RECOVERY. Vendor  will maintain a commercially reasonable disaster 
recovery plan. Such plan shall provide, at minimum, that (i) Vendor  shall notify the Sub scriber  
in writing (the "Notice") within 24 hours  of any civil or natural disaster that could negatively 
impact the Services; (ii) Vendor  shall provide Subscriber , within 24 hours  of said Notice, a plan 
to continue to provide the Services at an alternative process facility, and (iii) the  Services shall 
be fully operational within 48 hours of the initial Notice. Whenever a disaster causes Vendor  to 
allocate limited resources between or among the Subscriber's customers or clients or the  
Subscriber at the af fected service locations, the S ubscriber shall receive no less priority in respect 
of such allocation than that provided by  Vendor to  Vendor 's other similarly impacted customers 
and clients with services of a substantially similar nature. 
 
7.0   GENERAL ASSISTANCE NETWORK. Vendor will provide access to a network  of third-party 
Providers  consist ing of over 89,000 vetted medical and dental, security, and transport service providers. 
Vendor’s  staff will provide referrals and set appointments on behalf of members whenever reques ted to 
do so. Provider referrals are provided 24 hours per day utilizing an extensive network of over 89,000 
vetted medical, security, and travel assistance providers.   Vendor shall maintain  a dedicated department 
called GAN (Global Assistance Network) foc used exclusively on the development, growth, and 
maintenance of the provider network that manages and develops provider relations worldwide. The 
Vendor shall maintain  direct relationship s with providers and ensure  quality control.    Vendor’s  
methodology of  provider and location evaluation , policies and procedures as well as supporting systems 
including Vendor’s  Country City Healthcare Guides , electronic evaluation forms designed to capture 
detailed quantitative and qualitative information in a standardized manner, against a set criteria internally 
developed  shall be maintained and revised as needed.  Site visits shall be  conducted on a regular basis and 
based on a schedule that takes into consideration: overall quality of care available in a particular locati on, 
utilization review, provider ranking within our network, client specific survey requests .  Vendor shall 
conduct site survey s if, in Vendor’s sole opinion, a site survey is warranted.   On site surveys are 
conducted by Vendor may include  at least of one Global Assistance Network (GAN) staff 
(administrative) and one medical staff (Physician or Nurse), an aviation specialist might and a security 
specialist.  
Vendor shall  monitor  developments within the local healthcare system s in which Vendor maintains the 
Provider network . Each of Vendor’s  Assistance Centers shall have responsibility for a specific geographic 
area, to provide for the development of expertise in that geographic location, gathering local up -to-date 
knowledge on that area on a continuous real -time basis. This information shall also be  used for the online 
resources of email alerts and country guides as well as updating the provider network..  
Within the United States, Vendor shall  offer competitive re -pricing for inbound international travelers  via 
Vendor’s relationship with an  independent primary PPO network, enabling  access to negotiated pricing 
for medical care facilitated by participating plan providers..  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC57 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE  D- APPROVED SUBCONTRACTOR SCHEDULE  
The following subcontractors of Vendor  are hereby approved as of the Effective Date for the following 
scope , duration , and location of services : 
 
Country of Incorporation  Name  
Australia  International SOS (Australasia) Pty. Ltd.  
Australia  Assistance Travel (Australasia) Pty. Ltd.  
China  International SOS Travel Assistance Service (Beijing) 
Company Ltd  
China  International SOS (China) Ltd  
China  International SOS Travel Assistance Service (Beijing) 
Company Ltd, Shanghai Branch  
France  International SOS (Assistance) S.A.  
France  Blue Cross Travel Services B.V., Paris Branch  
Germany  International SOS GmbH  
Hong Kong  Ground Rescue Limited  
Hong Kong  Air Rescue China Limited  
Hong Kong  International SOS Assistance (HK) Limited  
India  Amas Medical Services Private Limited  
India  International SOS Services (India) Private Limited  
India  Travel Security Services India Private Limited  
Indonesia  Yayasan SOS Medika  
Indonesia  PT Asih Eka Abadi  
Indonesia  PT Alas Emas Abadi  
Indonesia  Yayasan Sosial Mandiri  
Japan  International SOS Japan Limited  
Malaysia  International SOS (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd.  
Philippines  International SOS (Phils.), Inc.  
Philippines  Global 24 Network Services, Inc.  
Republic of Korea  International SOS Korea Ltd 
Russian Federation  AEA International (Sakhalin) Zao  
Russian Federation  International SOS 24 LLC  
Russian Federation  AO International Medical Clinic  
Singapore  Air Rescue Asia Pte. Ltd.  
Singapore  Assistance Travel Pte. Ltd.  
Singapore  International SOS Pte Ltd  
Singapore  Travel Security Services Singapore Pte. Ltd.  
South Africa  Air Rescue Africa (Proprietary) Limited  
South Africa  Assistance Travel Proprietary Limited  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC58 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  South Africa  Europ Assistance International Health Solutions 
(Proprietary) Limite d 
South Africa  International SOS Services (Africa) (Proprietary) Limited  
South Africa  International SOS Assistance (Proprietary) Limited  
Spain  Akira Directorship, S.L.  
Switzerland  Air Rescue Europe S.A.  
Switzerland  SOS Assistance S.A.  
Switzerland  West African Rescue Association (Holding) AG  
Taiwan  International SOS (Taiwan) Company Limited  
Thailand  International SOS Services (Thailand) Limited  
United Arab Emirates  International SOS Gulf - Abu Dhabi  
United Kingdom  Associated Emergency Medical Centers (Holdings) Limited  
United Kingdom  International SOS Assistance UK Limited  
United Kingdom  Travel Security Services Limited  
United States, Delaware  International SOS Assistance, Inc.  
United States, Texas  Corporate Healthcare Management Services, Inc. 
United States, Texas  International SOS Assistance (Latam) Inc.  
Vietnam  International SOS Vietnam Co., Ltd.  
 
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC59 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE E - DATA PROCESSING ADDENDUM -CONTROLLER -TO-PROCESSOR  
Background.  
This data processing addendum (“DPA”) applies to Personal Inform ation received by Intl.SOS from 
Deloitte Firm in connection with the TravelTracker Service pursuant to the Agreement to which this DPA 
is attached.  It sets forth the technical and organizational measures Intl.SOS uses to protect such Personal 
Information.  This DPA, the Data Processing Addendum -Controller -to-Controller, the Standard Contractual 
Clauses if applicable, and the Agreement (and other exhibits, schedules, addenda, or ordering documents 
referenced therein) comprise the entire set of terms regardin g the subject matter hereof.   
Application of the Standard Contractual Clauses .  
If processing of Personal Information involves a cross -border transfer that by its terms necessitates 
Standard Contractual Clauses to accept the transfer of such Personal Information, the Standard Contractual 
Clauses or Privacy Shield certification shall a pply as stated and on the terms set forth in the Agreement.   
Definitions.  
“Data Protection Legislation” means the EU General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679; together with 
all other applicable legislation relating to privacy or data protection.  The t erms “personal data”, “data 
subject”, “controller" and “process” (and its derivatives) shall have the meanings given to them in Data 
Protection Legislation.  
Capitalized terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in  the 
Agreement.  
1 Data Protection  
1.1 Intl.SOS  shall comply with its obligations under Data Protection Legislation in respect 
of the Personal Information processed in connection with this DPA.    
 
1.2 Intl.SOS  shall act as a processor of Deloitte Firm in respect of such Personal 
Information.  The Agreement (including, if referenced in the Agreement, all Transaction 
Documents and other exhibits, schedules, addenda, or ordering documents referenced 
therein), sets out the scope of the processing carried out by Intl.SOS.   Nothing in this 
Section relieves Intl.SOS of its own obligations as processor under the Data Protection 
Legislation.  
 
1.3 In processing such Personal Information  in connection with this DPA , Intl.SOS shall:  
1.3.1 only process such Personal Information: (a) to the extent necessary to provide 
the Travel Tracker S ervice; (b) in accordance with the specific instructions of 
Deloitte Firm (save to the extent such instructions conflict with the Data 
Protection Legislation, in which case Intl.SOS shall notify Deloitte Firm ); or 
(c) as required by any regulator or applicable law;  
1.3.2 not disclose any such Personal Information to any third party, including for 
back -up and storage purposes, without Deloitte Firm’s prior written consent 
in each instance (provided that such consent may be given subject to 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC60 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  conditions and including that which may be given pursuant to Section 1.4), 
other than to the extent required by any competent authority or applicable law, 
in which case Vendor shall inform Deloitte Firm of such required disclosure 
prior to processing, unless prevented from doing so pursuant to applicable law;  
1.3.3 taking into account the state of the art, the costs of implementation, and the 
nature, scope, context, and purposes of processing as well as the risk of 
varying likelihood and severity for the rights and freedoms of data subjects, 
Vendor shall , in relation to such Personal Information , implement appropriate 
technical and organizational measures to maintain a level of security 
appropriate to the risk represented by the processing  and to protect such 
Personal Information against accidental or unlawful destruction or accidental 
loss, alteration, or unauthorized disclosure or access, which shall include, at a 
minimum, those specified in the Agreement;  
1.3.4 keep, and procure that all of it s Personnel keep such Personal Information 
confidential in accordance with the Vendor’s confidentiality obligations under 
the Agreement;  
1.3.5 maintain a record of its processing activities and provide all cooperation and 
information to Deloitte Firm as is reas onably necessary for Deloitte Firm to 
demonstrate compliance with its obligations pursuant to Data Protection 
Legislation, including, at a minimum, those audit rights set forth in the 
Agreement, including audits conducted by such Deloitte Firm or its regul ators 
to demonstrate compliance with the obligations under the Agreement and this 
DPA;  
1.3.6 notify DGSL and Deloitte Firm in writing without undue delay and in any 
event within 72 hours of discovery of, and provide reasonable cooperation in 
the event of, any S ecurity Incident or data breach leading to the accidental or 
unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to 
such Personal Information, and except to the extent required by applicable 
law, Vendor shall not undertake any com munications, notifications, or 
correspondence related to any such suspected breach with any regulator, third 
party, or data subject, in each case, without prior written consent of, and 
coordination with, DGSL and Deloitte Firm;  
1.3.7 provide technical means ava ilable to Deloitte Firm so that Deloitte Firm may 
respond directly to any request by a data subject to have access to or port such 
Personal Information held about them or in relation to any other request, 
allegation, or complaint by a competent authority o r data subject, including 
notifying Deloitte Firm in writing without undue delay (and in any event 
within 72 hours of receipt) of any such notice or request, and except to the 
extent required by applicable law, Intl.SOS  shall not undertake any 
communicatio ns, notifications, or correspondence related to any such request 
with any regulator, third party, or data subject, in each case, without prior 
written consent of, and coordination with, Deloitte Firm;  
1.3.8 unless terms are otherwise set forth in the Agreement relating to deletion or 
return of Personal Information, at the choice of Deloitte Firm, delete or return 
such Personal Information  to Deloitte Firm upon termination of the 
Agreement or at any time upon the written request of Deloitte Firm, and delete 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC61 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  all copies of such Personal Information (save to the extent that retention of 
copies is required by applicable law) providing written confirmation of such 
deletion to Deloitte Firm;  
1.3.9 not process such Personal Information outside the European Economic Area 
(“EEA ”) or a country not deemed to provide an adequate level of protection 
for Personal Information by any competent authority unless the Agreement 
sets forth ( a) the Standard Contractual Clauses shall apply, or ( b) another data 
protection agreement has been en tered into between Intl.SOS  and Deloitte 
Firm to legitimize the transfer of such Personal Information outside the EEA.  
In all cases, Intl.SOS  shall not transfer such Personal Information outside the 
EEA unless the transfer is subject to terms which satisf y the Data Protection 
Legislation, including the conditions of any applicable adequacy finding or 
decision.  
 
1.4 Intl.SOS  shall not engage any third party or other sub -processor to process Personal 
Information covered by this DPA on behalf of Deloitte Firm except as otherwise agreed 
in writing, including in the Agreement, which may refer to processing by Approved 
Subcontractors. Where a sub -processor is duly engaged to carry out specific processing 
activities on behalf of Deloitte Firm, Intl.SOS  shall ensure that it enters into a written 
contract with such sub -processor containing data protection obligations no less 
protective than those set forth in this DPA and the Agreement (“Equivalent 
Obligations”), which shall apply to the sub -processor. Intl.SOS  shall cause sub -
processor to comply with the Equivalent Obligations, and Intl.SOS  shall remain liable 
for the acts and omission of any such sub -processor, as further set forth in the 
Agreement.  
 
1.5 Intl.SOS  shall provide reasonable assistance to Deloit te Firm with respect to Deloitte 
Firm’s data protection impact assessments, and Deloitte Firm’s prior consultations with 
competent data privacy authorities, which Deloitte Firm reasonably considers to be 
required by Data Protection Legislation, in each cas e solely in relation to processing of 
Personal Information covered by this DPA by, and taking into account the nature of the 
processing and information available to, Intl.SOS . 
 
2 Details of Processing of Personal Information  
2.1 The subject matter, nature, and p urpose of processing are set forth in the Agreement.  
Personal Information is processed by Intl.SOS  in the course of providing the Services 
under the Agreement.  In particular, Personal Information is contained in systems which 
are developed and maintained  in the course of the provision of the Services.   
2.2 The processing shall continue until terminated in accordance with the Agreement.   
2.3 Types of Personal Information and categories of data subjects  covered by this DPA : 
(a) name, email, type and status, conta ct information, information about the position of 
the individual, mobile phone number, employee ID number, travel data including 
flights, car rental, hotels and train bookings, location data including GPS (only with 
employee’s active consent) IP Address/Lo cation  and other personal data required for 
the purpose as determined by the Controller . related to data subjects for whom such 
Personal Information may be processed.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC62 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  (b) The data subjects may include  Covered Personnel, and Personnel of the Deloitte 
Firm .;.  
 
3. Conflict  
 
The rights and obligations of Deloitte Firm and Intl.SOS  are otherwise set forth in the Agreement.  
In the event of any conflict between the terms of this DPA and the terms of the Agreement,  
the terms of the Agreement shall govern and c ontrol.   
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC63 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE F - Standard Contractual Clauses (processors)  
For the purposes of Article 26(2) of Directive 95/46/EC for the transfer of personal data to processors 
established in third countries which do not ensure an adequate level of data protection the Parties have 
agreed on the following  on the following Contr actual Clauses (the “ Clauses ”) in order to adduce 
adequate safeguards with respect to the protection of privacy and fundamental rights and freedoms of 
individuals for the transfer by the data exporter to the data importer of the personal data specified in 
Appendix 1.  
1.  Definitions  
For the purposes of the Clauses:  
(a) 'personal data', 'special categories of data', 'process/processing', 'controller', 'processor', 'data 
subject' and 'supervisory authority'  shall have the same meaning as in Directive 95/46/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data1; 
(b) 'the data exp orter'  means the controller who transfers the personal data;  
(c) 'the data importer'  means the processor who agrees to receive from the data exporter personal 
data intended for processing on his behalf after the transfer in accordance with his instructions  and 
the terms of the Clauses and who is not subject to a third country's system ensuring adequate 
protection within the meaning of Article 25(1) of Directive  95/46/EC;  
(d) 'the subprocessor'  means any processor engaged by the data importer or by any other  subprocessor 
of the data importer who agrees to receive from the data importer or from any other subprocessor 
of the data importer personal data exclusively intended for processing activities to be carried out 
on behalf of the data exporter after the tran sfer in accordance with his instructions, the terms of 
the Clauses and the terms of the written subcontract;  
(e) 'the applicable data protection law ' means the legislation protecting the fundamental rights and 
freedoms of individuals and, in particular, their right to privacy with respect to the processing of 
personal data applicable to a data controller in the Member State in which the data exporter is 
established;  
(f) 'technical and organisational security measures'  means those measures aimed at protect ing 
personal data against accidental or unlawful destruction or accidental loss, alteration, unauthorised 
disclosure or access, in particular where the processing involves the transmission of data over a 
network, and against all other unlawful forms of pro cessing.  
2. Details of the transfer  
The details of the transfer and in particular the special categories of personal data where applicable are 
specified in Appendix 1 which forms an integral part of the Clauses.   
 
                                                      
1 Parties may reproduce definitions and meanings contained in Directive 95/46/EC within this Clause 
if they considered it better for the contract to stand alone . 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC64 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  3. Third -party beneficiary clause  
1. The data subject can enforce against the data exporter this Clause, Clause 4(b) to (i), Clause 5(a) 
to (e), and (g) to (j), Clause 6(1) and (2), Clause 7, Clause 8(2), and Clauses 9 to 12 as third -party 
beneficiary.  
2. The data subject can enforce against the data importer this Clause, Clause 5(a) to (e) and (g), 
Clause 6, Clause 7, Clause 8(2), and Clauses 9 to 12, in cases where the data exporter has factually 
disappeared or has ceased to exist in law unless any succes sor entity has assumed the entire legal 
obligations of the data exporter by contract or by operation of law, as a result of which it takes on the 
rights and obligations of the data exporter, in which case the data subject can enforce them against 
such enti ty.  
3. The data subject can enforce against the subprocessor this Clause, Clause 5(a) to (e) and (g), 
Clause 6, Clause 7, Clause 8(2), and Clauses 9 to 12, in cases where both the data exporter and the 
data importer have factually disappeared or ceased to  exist in law or have become insolvent, unless 
any successor entity has assumed the entire legal obligations of the data exporter by contract or by 
operation of law as a result of which it takes on the rights and obligations of the data exporter, in 
which case the data subject can enforce them against such entity . Such third -party liability of the 
subprocessor shall be limited to its own processing operations under the Clauses.  
4. The Parties do not object to a data subject being represented by an associat ion or other body if the 
data subject so expressly wishes and if permitted by national law.  
4. Obligations of the data exporter  
The data exporter agrees and warrants:  
(a) that the processing, including the transfer itself, of the personal data has been a nd will continue 
to be carried out in accordance with the relevant provisions of the applicable data protection law 
(and, where applicable, has been notified to the relevant authorities of the Member State where the 
data exporter is established) and does n ot violate the relevant provisions of that State;  
(b) that it has instructed and throughout the duration of the personal data processing services will 
instruct the data importer to process the personal data transferred only on the data exporter's behalf 
and in accordance with the applicable data protection law and the Clauses;  
(c) that the data importer will provide sufficient guarantees in respect of the technical and 
organisational security measures specified in Appendix 2 to this contract;  
(d) that after assessment of the requirements of the applicable data protection law, the security 
measures are appropriate to protect personal data against accidental or unlawful destruction or 
accidental loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure or access, in  particular where the processing 
involves the transmission of data over a network, and against all other unlawful forms of processing, 
and that these measures ensure a level of security appropriate to the risks presented by the processing 
and the nature of  the data to be protected having regard to the state of the art and the cost of their 
implementation;  
(e) that it will ensure compliance with the security measures;  
(f) that, if the transfer involves special categories of data, the data subject has been in formed or will be 
informed before, or as soon as possible after, the transfer that its data could be transmitted to a 
third country not providing adequate protection within the meaning of Directive 95/46/EC;  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC65 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  (g) to forward any notification received from th e data importer or any subprocessor pursuant to Clause 
5(b) and Clause 8(3) to the data protection supervisory authority if the data exporter decides to 
continue the transfer or to lift the suspension;  
(h) to make available to the data subjects upon reques t a copy of the Clauses, with the exception of 
Appendix 2, and a summary description of the security measures, as well as a copy of any contract 
for subprocessing services which has to be made in accordance with the Clauses, unless the 
Clauses or the contr act contain commercial information, in which case it may remove such 
commercial information;  
(i) that, in the event of subprocessing, the processing activity is carried out in accordance with Clause 
11 by a subprocessor providing at least the same level of  protection for the personal data and the 
rights of data subject as the data importer under the Clauses; and  
(j) that it will ensure compliance with Clause 4(a) to (i).  
5. Obligations of the data importer  
The data importer agrees and warrants:  
(a) to process the personal data only on behalf of the data exporter and in compliance with its 
instructions and the Clauses; if it cannot provide such compliance for whatever reasons, it agrees 
to inform promptly the data exporter of its inability to comply, in which case the data exporter is 
entitled to suspend the transfer of data and/or terminate the contract;  
(b) that it has no reason to believe that the legislation applicable to it prevents it from fulfilling the 
instructions received from the data export er and its obligations under the contract and that in the 
event of a change in this legislation which is likely to have a substantial adverse effect on the 
warranties and obligations provided by the Clauses, it will promptly notify the change to the data 
exporter as soon as it is aware, in which case the data exporter is entitled to suspend the transfer of 
data and/or terminate the contract;  
(c) that it has implemented the technical and organisational security measures specified in Appendix 
2 before processing the personal data transferred;  
(d) that it will promptly notify the data exporter about:  
(i) any legally binding request for disclosure of the personal data by a law enforcement 
authority unless otherwise prohibited, such as a prohibition under criminal law to preserve 
the confidentiality of a law enforcement investigation,  
(ii) any accidental or unauthorised access, and  
(iii) any request received directly from the data subjects without responding to that request, 
unless it has been otherwise aut horised to do so;  
(e) to deal promptly and properly with all inquiries from the data exporter relating to its processing 
of the personal data subject to the transfer and to abide by the advice of the supervisory authority 
with regard to the processing of t he data transferred;  
(f) at the request of the data exporter to submit its data processing facilities for audit of the processing 
activities covered by the Clauses which shall be carried out by the data exporter or an inspection 
body composed of independen t members and in possession of the required professional 
qualifications bound by a duty of confidentiality, selected by the data exporter, where applicable, 
in agreement with the supervisory authority;  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC66 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  (g) to make available to the data subject upon request  a copy of the Clauses, or any existing contract 
for subprocessing, unless the Clauses or contract contain commercial information, in which case it 
may remove such commercial information, with the exception of Appendix 2 which shall be 
replaced by a summar y description of the security measures in those cases where the data subject 
is unable to obtain a copy from the data exporter;  
(h) that, in the event of subprocessing, it has previously informed the data exporter and obtained its 
prior written consent;  
(i) that the  processing services by the subprocessor will be carried out in accordance with Clause 11 ; 
(j) to send promptly a copy of any subprocessor agreement it concludes under the Clauses to the data 
exporter.  
6. Liability  
1. The Parties agree that any d ata subject, who has suffered damage as a result of any breach of the 
obligations referred  to in Clause 3 or in Clause 11 by any party or subprocessor is entitled to 
receive compensation  from the data exporter for the damage suffered.  
2. If a data subject is not able to bring a claim for compensation in accordance with paragraph 1 against 
the data exporter, arising out of a breach by the data importer or his subprocessor of any of their 
obligations referred to in Clause 3 or in Clause 11, because the data e xporter has factually 
disappeared or ceased to exist in law or has become insolvent, the data importer agrees that the data 
subject may issue a claim against the data importer as if it were the data exporter, unless any 
successor entity has assumed the ent ire legal obligations of the data exporter by contract o r by 
operation of law, in which case the data subject can enforce its rights against such entity.  
The data importer may not rely on a breach by a subprocessor  of its obligations in order to avoid 
its own liabilities.  
3. If a data subject is not able to bring a claim against the data exporter or the data importer referred to 
in paragraphs 1 and 2, arising out of a breach by the subprocessor of any of their oblig ations referred 
to in Clause 3 or in Clause 11 because both the data exporter and the data importer have factually 
disappeared or ceased to exist in law or have become insolvent, the subprocessor agrees that the data 
subject may issue a claim against the d ata subprocessor  with regard to its own processing operations 
under the Clauses as if it were the data exporter or the data importer, unless any successor entity 
has assumed the entire legal obligations of the data exporter or data importer by contract or by 
operation of law, in which case the data subject can enforce its rights against such entity.  The liability 
of the subprocessor shall be limited to its own processing operations under the Clauses.  
7. Mediation and jurisdiction  
1. The data importer agrees  that if the data subject invokes against it third -party beneficiary rights 
and/or claims compensation for damages under the Clauses, the data importer will accept the 
decision of the data subject:  
(a) to refer the dispute to mediation, by an independent p erson or, where applicable, by the 
supervisory authority;  
(b) to refer the dispute to the courts in the Member State in which the data exporter is 
established.  
2. The Parties agree that the choice made by the data subject will not prejudice its substantive  or 
procedural rights to seek remedies in accordance with other provisions of national or international 
law. 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC67 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  8. Cooperation with supervisory authorities  
1. The data exporter agrees to deposit a copy of this contract with the supervisory authority if it so 
requests or if such deposit is required under the applicable data protection law. 
2. The Parties agree that the supervisory authority has the right to conduct an audit of the data importer, 
and of any subprocessor, which has the same scope and is subject to the same conditions as would 
apply to an audit of the data exporter under the appli cable data protection law.  
3. The data importer shall promptly inform the data exporter about the existence of legislation 
applicable to it or any subprocessor preventing the conduct of an audit of the data importer, or 
any subprocessor, pursuant to paragr aph 2. In such a case the data exporter shall be entitled to 
take the measures foreseen in Clause 5(b).  
9. Governing Law  
The Clauses shall be governed by the law of the Member State in which the data exporter is established.  
10. Variation of the contract  
The Parties undertake not to vary or modify the Clauses. This does not preclude the parties from adding 
clauses on business related issues where required as long as they do not contradict the Clause s. 
11. Subprocessing  
1. The data importer shall not subcont ract any of its processing operations performed on behalf of 
the data exporter under the Clauses without the prior written consent of the data exporter. Where 
the data importer subcontracts its obligations under the Clauses, with the consent of the data 
exporter, it shall do so only by way of a written agreement with the subprocessor which imposes 
the same obligations on the subprocessor as are imposed on the data importer under the Clauses. 
Where the subprocessor fails to fulfil its data protection obligat ions under such written agreement 
the data importer shall remain fully liable to the data exporter for the performance of the 
subprocessor's obligations under such agreement.  
2. The prior written contract between the data importer and the subprocessor sha ll also provide for 
a third -party beneficiary clause as laid down in Clause 3 for cases where the data subject is not 
able to bring the claim for compensation referred to in paragraph 1 of Clause 6 against the data 
exporter or the data importer because the y have factually disappeared or have ceased to exist in 
law or have become insolvent and no successor entity has assumed the entire legal obligations of 
the data exporter or data importer by contract or by operation of law. Such third -party liability of 
the subprocessor shall be limited to its own processing operations under the Clauses.  
3. The provisions relating to data protection aspects for subprocessing of the contract referred to in 
paragraph 1 shall be governed by the law of the Member State in which  the data exporter is 
established.  
4. The data exporter shall keep a list of subprocessing agreements concluded under the Clauses and 
notified by the data importer pursuant to Clause 5 (j), which shall be updated at least once a year. The 
list shall be ava ilable to the data exporter's data protection supervisory authority.  
12. Obligation after the termination of personal data processing services  
1. The Parties agree that on the termination of the provision of data processing services, the data 
importer and th e subprocessor shall, at the choice of the data exporter, return all the personal data 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC68 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  transferred and the copies thereof to the data exporter or shall destroy all the personal data and 
certify to the data exporter that it has done so, unless legislation i mposed upon the data importer 
prevents it from returning or destroying all or part of the personal data transferred.  In that case, 
the data importer warrants that it will guarantee the confidentiality of the personal data transferred 
and will not actively  process the personal data.   
 
   
2. The data importer and the subprocessor  warrant that upon request of the data exporter and/or of the 
supervisory authority, it will submit its data processing facilities for an audit of the measures 
referred to in paragraph 1.  
 
On behalf of the data importer:    On behalf of the data exporter:  
International SOS  Assistance Inc    Deloitte Firm:________________________  
Signature:   _______________________   Signature:   ______________________  
Printed Name:   Paul Jarrett Michau    Printed Name:   ______________________  
Title:  Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  Title:   ______________________  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC69 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  APPENDIX 1 TO SCHEDULE F - STANDARD CONTRACTUAL  CLAUSES  
This Appendix forms part of the Clauses and must be completed and signed by the data importer and data 
exporter.  
The Mem ber States may complete or specify, according to their national procedures, any additional 
necessary information to be contained in this Appendix.  
Data exporter  
The data exporter is a Deloitte Firm.  
Data importer  
Vendor is a provider of services to Deloitt e Firms, and provides data processing services to the data 
exporter . 
Data subjects  
The personal data transferred concern the following categories of data subjects (please specify):  
Categories of data subject may include, but is not limited to the data exporter’s and its affiliated entities’  
 Current partners, principals, directors, officers, employees ; and   
the relatives, guardians and associates of the above  
as the same may change d uring the term of the Agreement.  
Categories of data  
The personal data transferred concern the following categories of data (please specify):  
All types of Personal Data including but not limited to:  
 Employee identification number  
 Employee name (first, middl e, last);  
  Employee ID number Contact information including telephone, voicemail, fax, mobile, mailing and 
email address;  
travel data including flights, car rental, hotels, train bookings, IP Address/Location and other personal 
data required for the purpose  as determined by the Controller .  
Special categories of data (if appropriate)  
None.  
Processing operations  
The personal data transferred will be subject to the following basic processing activities:  
 data importer will provide data centre facilities which w ill host applications storing and processing 
personal data on behalf of the data exporter.  
 data importer will where applicable provide network connectivity, security, back -ups and reporting.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC70 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc   data importer will provide application management services including consulting and support and 
maintenance services which may involve operations being performed on personal data including, 
collection, recording, organisation, storage, adaptation, erasure or destruction and use for the 
registration of incidents and change requests as reported and/or requested by the data exporter.  
 
On behalf of the data importer:    On behalf of the data exporter:  
International SOS Assistance Inc.    Deloitte Firm: __________ _________  
Signature:        Signature:   ______________________  
Printed Name:   Paul Jarrett Michau    Printed Name:   ______________________  
Title:   Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  Title:   ______________________  
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC71 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  APPENDIX 2 TO SCHEDULE F - STANDARD  CONTRACTUAL CLAUSES  
This Appendix forms part of the Clauses and must be completed and signed by the data importer and the 
data exporter.  
 
Description of the technical and organizational security measures implemented by the data 
importer in accordance with Clauses 4(d) and 5(c):  
 
In addition to the obligations relating to security and confidentiality as set forth in the Agreement, data 
importer will take the measures described below.  
 
International SOS is committed to safeguarding the confide ntiality, integrity and availability of the 
information we use.  We demonstrate this commitment by employing defense in depth computing with 
multiple layers of security.  Below are some of the security layers we utilize:  
  
 Encryption Mechanisms   Security Awareness 
Training  
 End Point Security Controls   Firewall & Intrusion 
Detection Systems  
 Logging and Auditing   VPN and 2 factor 
Authentication  
 Vulnerability Assessment and 
Penetration Testing   Identification, Authorization 
and Accounting  
 Physical Security &  Surveillance   Logical Segregation of 
Networks  
 
Information security governance is led by the Group Executive Committee (Ex -Co), Data Protection 
Committee (DPC) and Information Security Management Committee (ISMC).  This structure includes 
our Group Managing Directors, Chief Data Protection Officer and Chief Security Officer.  
 
The collection, use, storage transfer and disposal of client information are required by the provision of 
our medical assistance and travel security services. Our policies are t he cornerstone of our approach to 
information security and data protection with focus on defending information from unauthorized 
access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, perusal, inspection, recording or destruction.  
 
International SOS adheres to  and is certified by:  
 
• European Union Directive 95/46/EC, of the European parliament and the Council  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC72 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  • Binding Corporate Rules sanctioned by the European Community’s data protection authorities, 
approved by the French Data Protection Authority (CNIL),  
• TRUSTe Privacy certification  
• Contractual commitments with customers and vendors  
International SOS proactively conducts security audits annually and contracts with independent 3rd 
party vendors to perform penetration, vulnerability and threat analysis tes ting within our IT 
environment.    
 
 
On behalf of the data importer:    On behalf of the data exporter:  
International SOS Assistance Inc    Deloitte Firm: ___________________  
Signature:   _______________________   Signature:   ______________________  
Printed Name:   Paul Jarrett Michau    Printed Name:   ______________________  
Title: Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  Title:   ______________________  
 
 
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC73 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE G - DATA PROCESSING ADDENDUM -CONTROLLER -TO-CONTROLLER  
 
This Controller -to-Controll er Data Processing Addendum sets out the terms that apply as between 
Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm when processing Personal Information provided in connection with the 
Medical Assistance Service, Travel Assistance Service and Security Assistance Service (coll ectively the 
“Services ”) pursuant to the Agreement. Capitalized terms used in this Addendum shall have the meanings 
given to them in the Agreement and the Controller -to-Processor Data Processing Addendum unless 
otherwise defined herein. Capitalized terms u sed but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings 
ascribed to them in the Controller -to-Processor Data Processing Addendum Agreement.  
Data Processing  
1. Purpose of Processing :  Intl.SOS  and Deloitte Firm acknowledge that in connection with 
the Services, Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm may provide or make available Personal 
Information.  Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm shall process Personal Information covered by this 
Data Processing Addendum: (i)  for the purposes described in the Agreement and (ii) as may 
otherwise be permitted under Data Protection Legislation.  
 
2.  Relationship of the parties . Intl.SOS  and Deloitte Firm will each process the Personal 
Information covered by this Data Processing Addendum as an independent controller (not as 
a joint controller with the other party).  
 
3. Compliance with law . Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm shall separately comply with each of their 
obligations under Applicable Data Protection Law and this Addendum when processing 
Personal Information covered by this Data Protection Legislation. Neither Intl.SOS nor 
Deloitte Firm shall be responsible for the other’s compliance with Data Protection 
Legislation. In particular, each of Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm shall be individually 
responsible for ensuring that its processing of such Personal Information is lawful, fair and 
transparent.  
 
4. Security:   Intl.SOS and Deloitte Firm shall eac h implement and maintain appropriate 
technical and organizational measures to preserve the security and confidentiality of the 
Personal Information covered by this Data Processing Addendum and to protect such 
Personal Information from (i) accidental or unl awful destruction, and (ii) loss, alteration, or 
unauthorized disclosure or access. Intl.SOS measures as an independent controller shall be, 
at a minimum, the same as those measures implemented by Intl.SOS in its role as processor.  
 
5. Cooperation and data su bjects’ rights.  In the event that IntI.SOS receives: (i) any request 
from a data subject to exercise any of its rights under Data Protection Legislation (including 
its rights of access, correction, objection, erasure, restriction or data portability, as 
applicable); or (ii) any other correspondence, inquiry or complaint from a data subject, 
regulator or other third party in connection with the processing of the Personal Information by 
Deloitte Firm acting as controller (collectively, “Correspondence”), Int l.SOS shall promptly 
inform Deloitte Firm and shall cooperate in good faith as necessary to assist Deloitte Firm in 
responding to such Correspondence and fulfill its respective obligations under Data 
Protection Legislation.  Intl.SOS shall not respond to su ch Correspondence unless otherwise 
authorized by such Deloitte Firm in writing.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC74 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc   
 
6. International transfers. Personal Information covered by this Data Processing Addendum 
may not be processed by Intl.SOS outside of the EEA  or in any country not deemed to 
provide an adequate level of protection for Personal Information by any competent authority 
unless Intl.SOS has taken such measures necessary to ensure the transfer is in compliance 
with Data Protection Legislation.  To the extent Intl.SOS transfers such Perso nal Information 
in connection with the Services to a territory outside the EEA that does not provide adequate 
protection for Personal Data (as determined by Data Protection Legislation), Intl.SOS agrees 
to abide by and process such Personal Information in accordance with the following Binding 
Corporate Rules approved by the French Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des 
Libertés (“CNIL”): AT/EBI/CS111049 dated April 20, 2011  
 
7. Conflict: The rights and obligations of Deloitte Firm and Intl.SOS are otherw ise set forth in 
the Agreement.  In the event of conflict between this Data Protection Addendum and the 
terms of the Agreement, the terms of the Agreement shall control.   
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC75 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  SCHEDULE H - Certificate of Subscription  # __ 
This Certificate of Subscription  is subject to the terms and conditions of the COMPREHENSIVE 
SERVICE PROGRAM  PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT  (the “ Agreement ”), by and between Deloitte 
Touche Tohmatsu Services, Inc. (“ DTTS ”), as agent for its parent, Deloitte Global Services Limited 
(“DGSL ”), and  International SOS Assistance, Inc.  (“Intl.SOS ”). Capitalized terms used and not defined 
herein have the same meaning as in the Agree ment.  
The Commencement D ate of this Certificate of Subscription  is ________ __ , 20__ (the “ Service 
Order Effective Date ”). 
Service : 
Service  Name  Subscription 
Term  Quantity  Unit Price  Discounted 
Unit Price  Extended 
Discounted 
Price  
 XX/XX/XXXX  
to 
XX/XX/XXXX      
 XX/XX/XXXX  
to 
XX/XX/XXXX      
 XX/XX/XXXX  
to 
XX/XX/XXXX      
 XX/XX/XXXX  
to 
XX/XX/XXXX      
      
    TOTAL   
 
Total Fees:  $0.00  
Special Terms:  
[Insert any special terms here .  Consider the following items:  
 Training  
 Implementation Services  
 Deloitte Branding of the Service ] 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC76 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Invoices should be sent to:  The following information must  be included on 
any invoice that Vendor  submits to DGSL  
under this Certificate of Subscription : 
DGSLGOVendorPayables@deloitte.com   
 
The billing address reflected on the invoice 
submitted via email must be:  
 
Deloitte Global Services  Limited  
ATTN:   Accounts Payable  
Two Jericho Plaza - 3rd Floor  
Jericho, NY   11753  
 
 
  
Applicable Cost Center(s): _57651 ____________  
Business Unit Approver(s):_ Ted Almay/Sean 
Toohey   
 
GP Representative:  Mei Cheung ________  
Vendor Representative:  
       Name:  Roy Benninghoff  ______  
       Email:_  
Roy.Benninghoff@internationalsos.com   
 
Passwords or other information  relevant to the 
Service  should be sent to:  DGSL  contact for questions about this 
Certificate of Subscription : 
  
  
Attention:   
  
Email:    
 Deloitte Global  Services  Limited  
30 Rockefeller Plaza  
New York, NY 10112 -0015  
USA   
Attn:  Global  Procurement Administrator  
Email:  globalprocurement@deloitte.com  
  
Each of D GSL and Vendor has caused this Certificate of Subscription  to be signed by its duly 
authorized representative and become effective as of the Certificate of Subscription  Effective Date.  
Vendor:       DGSL:  
International SOS Assistance, Inc.    Deloitte Touche  Tohmatsu Services, Inc.  
       As agent for Deloitte Global Services Limited  
 
By:       By:       
Name:  Paul Jarrett Michau     Name:        
Title:  Chief Executive Officer, Assistance Americas  Title:        
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC77 
 SCHEDULE I - Participation Agreement  
This Participation Agreement is between the undersigned firm (“ Your Firm ”) and each vendor listed on 
the attached Schedule (each a “ Vendor ” and as that Schedule may be amended from time to time, t he 
“Schedule ”), and creates separate and distinct contracts between Your Firm on the one hand, and each 
Vendor on the other.  This Participation Agreement creates no contractual relationship between Vendors.   
Deloitte Global Services Limited (“ DGSL ”) has entered into an agreement with each Vendor (each a 
“Vendor Agreement ”) to make certain Vendor products and services (individually or collectively, “ P/S”) 
available to DGSL, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited (“ DTTL ”), DTTL’s member firms, and its and their 
affiliated entities (each a “ Deloitte Firm ”).   
A Deloitte Firm that signs this Participation Agreement (a “ Participating Firm ”) may participate in the 
Vendor Agreements and it, its affiliated entities and its and their personnel may use the P/S, all in 
accordance with the terms hereof.  
By having Your Firm’s authorized representative sign in the space provided below, Your Firm and each 
Vendor hereby agree to the following:  
1. The Vendor Agreements .  DGSL will provide you with access to material information and  
documentation with respect to each Vendor Agreement listed on the Schedule.  Your Firm may use this 
information, and any other information Your Firm receives with respect to such Vendor Agreement, to 
decide whether to participate in such Vendor Agreement.   In particular, Your Firm acknowledges that 
DGSL has provided Your Firm with access to, and that Your Firm has read, a copy of each Vendor 
Agreement listed on the Schedule.  Subject to Clause 3.b.  below and the other terms hereof, Your Firm 
shall be bound  by the terms of any such Vendor Agreement as a “Participating Firm” thereunder, with 
all the rights and obligations of a “Participating Firm” set forth therein.  In the event of a conflict 
between the terms of any such Vendor Agreement and the terms of th is Participation Agreement, the 
terms of such Vendor Agreement shall prevail.  
2. Your Firm’s Affiliates and Your Firm’s Users .  
a. “Your Firm’s Affiliates ” means any of Your Firm’s affiliated entities in Your Firm’s Territory (as 
that Territory is described belo w in the signature lines).  
b. “Your Firm’s Users ” means any individuals allowed by Your Firm or Your Firm’s Affiliates to 
use any P/S.  
c. Your Firm’s Affiliates and Your Firm’s Users may use any P/S as provided herein and in the 
applicable Vendor Agreement; provided , that Your Firm shall be responsible for any action or 
inaction of Your Firm’s Affiliates and of Your Firm’s Users that causes a violation of the terms of 
this Participation Agreement or the applicable Vendor Agreement.  
3. Changes to this Participation Agreement; Schedules .  
a. Except for amendments to the Schedule as provided below, this Participation Agreement may not 
be amended without the written consent of DGSL, Your Firm and the applicable Vendors.  The 
Schedule may only be amended as set forth in Clause 3.b.  below.  
b. The Schedule will list each Vendor Agreement that Your Firm may participate in and, where 
applicable, the specific P/S that you may/may not participate in, along with certain other relevant 
information.  DGSL may from time to time send You r Firm a Schedule that is amended to add or 
delete one or more Vendors, Vendor Agreements, P/S or any other relevant information and, where 
applicable, provide Your Firm, at that time, with access to newly added Vendor Agreements and 
other relevant informa tion.   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC78 
 1. If the amended Schedule reflects the deletion of a Vendor Agreement or of a P/S from your 
previous Schedule, such deletion shall be effective upon receipt of the amended Schedule or as 
otherwise set forth in the amended Schedule or in DGSL’s accomp anying notice, and Your 
Firm’s participation in such Vendor Agreement or P/S shall terminate upon such effectiveness.   
2. If the amended Schedule reflects any other change, then, as to Your Firm, such change shall be 
effective 15 business days after Your Fir m’s receipt of the amended Schedule or on such later 
date as is set forth therein or in DGSL’s accompanying notice (as used in this Clause 3.b.2 , the 
“Notice Period ”), unless Your Firm provides DGSL, within the applicable Notice Period, with 
written notice  of Your Firm’s decision to terminate its participation in the Vendor 
Agreement(s) implicated by such change.  If DGSL receives Your Firm’s notice of termination 
within the applicable Notice Period, such change shall not be applicable to Your Firm.  For 
example, (i) where the change implicated an existing Vendor Agreement, Your Firm shall 
operate under the prior terms of the Vendor Agreement until DGSL receives Your Firm’s notice 
of termination, at which point such Vendor Agreement shall terminate as to You r Firm, and (ii) 
where the change added a new Vendor Agreement not previously on Your Schedule, Your 
Firm’s notice of “termination” of such Vendor Agreement will confirm Your Firm’s decision 
to decline participation in such new Vendor Agreement, and Your F irm will never have been 
bound by such new Vendor Agreement.  
c. As to Your Firm and each Vendor, the information relating to such Vendor and its Vendor 
Agreement in Your Firm’s Schedule, as it is amended from time to time in accordance herewith, 
shall be an i ntegral part of this Participation Agreement.  
4. Changes to Vendor Agreement .  In addition to changes referenced in Clause 3.b.  hereof, DGSL and 
the applicable Vendor may extend, renew and/or amend any Vendor Agreement.  DGSL will provide 
Your Firm with notic e of such amendment and, where applicable, provide Your Firm at that time with 
access to amendment documents and other relevant information.  Your Firm shall be bound by the 
terms of such extended, renewed and/or amended Vendor Agreement, effective 15 busi ness days after 
Your Firm’s receipt of DGSL’s notice or on such later date as is set forth therein (as used in this Clause 
4, the “ Notice Period ”), unless Your Firm provides DGSL, within the Notice Period, with written 
notice of Your Firm’s decision to ter minate its participation in the applicable Vendor Agreement.  If 
DGSL receives Your Firm’s notice of termination within the applicable Notice Period, such amendment 
shall not be applicable to Your Firm and Your Firm’s termination of its participation in th e Vendor 
Agreement shall be effective upon receipt by DGSL of Your Firm’s notice of termination.  
5. Termination of Participation . 
a. Your Firm may terminate its participation in any Vendor Agreement upon written notice to the 
applicable Vendor and DGSL if Your F irm determines in its sole   discretion  that the existence of 
such Vendor Agreement or any performance by Your Firm or any party thereunder would be in 
conflict with any independence requirements, professional rules, or laws relating to the provision 
of audit or accounting services by any Deloit te Firm.  
b. Your Firm may terminate its participation in any Vendor Agreement by providing DGSL at least 
60 days’ prior written notice of such termination.  
c. Your Firm’s participation in a Vendor Agreement shall terminate as provided in Clause 3.b.  and 
Clause 4 hereof.  
d. Your Firm’s participation in a Vendor Agreement shall terminate upon termination of such Vendor 
Agreement for any reason in accordance with its terms, including termination or expiration of a 
Vendor Agreement due to DGSL’s action or inaction.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC79 
 e. Your Firm’s participation in a Vendor Agreement shall terminate as otherwise provided in such 
Vendor Agreement.    
f. Your Firm’s participation in all Vendor Agreements shall terminate on the date that it ceases to be 
a Deloitte Firm.  
6. Effects of Termination .  
a. Upon the effectiveness, pursuant to Clause 3.b.  hereof, of an amended Schedule that terminates 
your participation in any specific P/S, Your Firm, Your Firm’s Affiliates and Your Firm’s Users 
may no longer use, pursuant to this Participation Agreement, suc h P/S, except as may otherwise be 
explicitly permitted by such Vendor Agreement.  
b. Upon termination of Your Firm’s participation with respect to any Vendor Agreement, Your Firm, 
Your Firm’s Affiliates, and Your Firm’s Users may no longer use, pursuant to th is Participation 
Agreement, any P/S related to such Vendor Agreement, except as may otherwise be explicitly 
permitted by such Vendor Agreement.  
c. Notwithstanding the above, upon termination of Your Firm’s participation in any specific P/S as 
referenced in Clause 6.a.,  or in this Participation Agreement with respect to any Vendor Agreement 
as referenced in Clause 6.b. , any rights or obligations contained in the relevant Vendor Agreement 
that are both applicable to Your Firm and by their terms survive such ter mination shall continue to 
apply to Your Firm.  
d. For clarification, termination of Your Firm’s participation in any Vendor Agreement or any P/S 
shall not affect any retrospective or prospective payment or other obligations that Your Firm might 
have to DGSL or any other Deloitte Firm regarding such Vendor Agreement or P/S, which shall be 
governed by separate arrangement between Your Firm and DGSL or such other Deloitte Firm.  
e. DGSL shall bear no liability to Your Firm with respect to termination or expiration of any Vendor 
Agreement, termination of Your Firm’s participation in any P/S or any Vendor Agreement, or 
termination of this Participation Agreement.  
f. Any term hereof that should reasonably survive termination of this Participation Agreement shall 
survive s uch termination, including Clause 6  and Clause 7  hereof.  
7. Certain Legal Matters .  By signing this Participation Agreement, Your Firm enters into a contractual 
relationship with each Vendor to the extent specified herein, which enables such Vendor to have l egal 
rights against Your Firm, including the right to enforce the terms of this Participation Agreement and 
the applicable Vendor Agreement directly against Your Firm.  This Participation Agreement is 
governed by the laws of the State of New York, USA, wit hout reference to principles of conflict of 
laws.  This Participation Agreement is executed in the English language only.  Use of the term 
“including” herein shall mean “including without limitation”.   Although DGSL is not a party to this 
Participation Ag reement and has no liability hereunder, DGSL is a third party beneficiary to this 
Participation Agreement and has certain rights under it.  A facsimile, photocopy or electronic copy of 
this signed Participation Agreement shall be as valid and binding as th e original.  
 
Legal Name of Your Firm:   ___________________________________________  
Territory of Your Firm:       ___________________________________________  
By (Signature) : ___________________________________________  
Printed Name : ________________________ ___________________  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC80 
 Title : ___________________________________________  
Date : ___________________________________________  
 
Contact for Notices : 
Printed Name : ___________________________________________  
Email : ___________________________________________  
Facsimile : ___________________________________________  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC81 
GP-SaaS Participation Agreement.doc  Schedule to Participation Agreement  
______________ __, 20__  
 
Vendor  Agreement/Document  Other Information  
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 2298531B-72C2-49A3-A51D-4A1F2A142CBC