 
 
HOT TOPICS IN EMPLOYMENT 
LAW 
 
 
 
  
 
© 2018 by International Risk Management Institute, Inc.® 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.  THIS COURSE OR ANY PART THEREOF MAY NOT BE REPRODUCED 
IN ANY FORM OR BY ANY MEANS WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF T HE 
PUBLISHER. 
 
All course materials relating to  this course are copyrighted by  IRMI. Purchase of a course includes a 
license for one person to use the course materials. Absent spec ific written permission from IRMI, it is not 
permissible to distribute files containing course materials or printed versions of course materials to 
individuals who have n ot purchased the courses. It is also not permissible to make the course materials 
available to others over a computer network, Intranet, Internet , or any other storage, transmittal, or 
retrieval system. 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritat ive information in regard to the subject 
matter covered. It is sold with  the understanding that the publ isher is not engaged in rendering legal, 
accounting, or other professional service. If professional advi ce is required, the services of a competent 
professional should be sought. 
  
IRMI 
® 
International Risk Management Institute, Inc. ® 
12222 Merit Drive, Suite 1600 
Dallas, TX 75251-2266 
(972) 960-7693 
Fax (972) 371-5120 
www.IRMI.com 
International Risk Management Institute, Inc. ,® and IRMI® are registered trademarks. 
    i Hot Topics in Employment Law 
Contents
Getting Started ............................................... ............................................................... .............................. 1 
Course Overview  ............................................................................................................................. ..... 1 
About the Presenter: Christine Sensenig, Esq. .............................................................. ....................... 1 
Introduction ................................................................................................................. ................................ 2 
Chapter 1 Title VII ........................................... ............................................................... ........................... 3 
Title VII ..................................................... ............................................................... ................................ 3 
Chapter 2 Sexual Harassment ................................... ............................................................... ................. 4 
Introduction to Red/Yellow/Green Scenarios .................... ............................................................... ........ 4 
Sexual Harassment ............................................. ............................................................... ....................... 4 
Chapter 3 Sex and Religion Harassment ......................... ............................................................... .......... 7 
Sex and Religion Harassment ................................... ............................................................... ................. 7 
Chapter 4 Religion and National Origin/Race Harassment ........ ............................................................ 9 
Religion and National Or igin/Race Harassment................... ............................................................... ..... 9 
Chapter 5 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) ............... ............................................................... .. 13 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) ......................... ............................................................... ........ 13 
ADA Scenarios ................................................. ...................................................................................... 14 
Chapter 6 Pregnancy Discrimination ............................ ............................................................... ........... 18 
Pregnancy Discrimination ...................................................................................................................... 18 
Chapter 7 Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) ......... ....................................................... 20 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) ................... .............................................................. 20 
Chapter 8 Family and Medica l Leave Act (FMLA) .............. ............................................ ..................... 24 
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) ........................... ............................................................... ...... 24 
Chapter 9 Retaliation ......................................... ...................................................................................... 29 
Retaliation............................................................................................................................................... 29 
Glossary ...................................................... ............................................................................................... 32  
1 Getting Started 
Course Overview 
Insurance professionals and risk managers must be aware of expo sures arising for employment law 
claims. Employment-related claims can be very costly, driven by  the high attorney's fees involved in these 
claims. Many of the laws have mandatory attorney's fees that wi ll be awarded to the attorney representing 
the employee against your company or against your client, even if only one of the many claims they have 
asserted is proven, and even if only one portion or one claim o f the amount sought is awarded. Even when 
there are no mandatory fees, attorney’s fees can be high, even when no damages are awarded to a 
claimant. 
There are a number of laws that impact employment law, but Titl e VII is the cornerstone. Title VII was 
passed in the 1960s when demands for equal treatment was high. Title VII protects against discrimination, 
harassment, or retaliation based on certain protected categorie s. Title VII makes it illegal for an employer 
to fail or refuse to hire or discharge any individual, or other wise to discriminate against any individual, 
with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of an individual's 
race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.  
This course will review the Acts in detail focusing on discrimi nation based on sex, gender, religion, 
racial, and national origin, along with insurance implications for the various exposures. 
About the Presenter: Christine Sensenig, Esq. 
Christine Sensenig, a partner with the firm of Hultman, Senseni g & Joshi, graduated from the University 
of Florida Levin College of Law. She has been in practice for o ver 18 years and has conducted many 
seminars on compliance with the m yriad of laws affecting employ ers. She conducts Form I-9 audits, 
advises about workers’ compensa tion matters, including return t o work and the interaction between 
workers’ compensation and the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Family Medical Leave Act, and now 
the Genetic Information Non-Discrimination Act. She assists wit h the preparation of handbooks and then 
training both staff and management to reduce potential exposure  when claims of harassment, 
discrimination and retaliation arise. She investigates claims o f harassment, discrimin ation and retaliation 
from the making of the claim t hrough the EEOC/FCHR process, and  then through litiga tion in the state 
and federal courts. 
Ms. Sensenig is active in the Sar asota community. She served as  Treasurer for three years and President 
for two years of the Sarasota County Gator Club, the local Univ ersity of Florida Alumni Association. 
She’s helped raise tens of thou sands of dollars in funds to aid  local students who are attending the 
University of Florida. Christine has served on the Board of the  Sarasota Chapter of the Florida 
Association of Women Lawyers and received the President’s Servi ce Award for service above and 
beyond expectations. She currently serves on the Board of the F ederally Qualified Health Center in 
Sarasota/North Port and the Women’s Resource Center. She is a m ember of the Sarasota County Bar, 
Florida Bar, and American Bar A ssociations, and is also a membe r of the Labor & Employment Section 
of each of those organizations. C hristine was recognized by her  peers as a “Florida Legal Elite” lawyer in 
Florida Trend Magazine in 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 .  
2 Introduction 
Hi, my name is Christine Sensenig. I'm an employment attorney w ith over 20 years of experience in 
human resources and employment law issues. We're going to discu ss how to become aware of 
employment law issues, consid er exposures, address traditional covers limitations, and bring value to 
your organization. Because after all, we're all in the business  of risk management.   
3 Chapter 1 
Title VII 
Title VII 
As an insurance professional and risk manager, one of the thing s you really need to be aware of is there's 
legal exposure for employment la w claims, which c an be extremel y high as to the attorney's fees that are 
involved in these claims. Many of the laws we're going to be ta lking about have mandatory attorney’s 
fees that will be awarded to the attorney representing the empl oyee against your company or against your 
client, even if only one of the many claims they've asserted is  proven, and even if only one portion or one 
claim of the amount sought is awarded.  
Attorney's fees are pretty much guaranteed. So let's start with  the grandfather of all civil rights laws, Title 
VII. Title VII was passed in th e 1960s. We all know there was a  lot of turmoil, there was a lot of 
protesting, and a lot of marching going on in the 1960s. And pe ople were demanding to be treated equally 
, and in a way that is similar to  people who were different tha n them. 
So we look at what Title VII actually protects. And Title VII r equires that due to a protected category, 
you cannot have discrimination, harassment, or retaliation base d on that protective category, particularly 
in the employment law context. So Title VII makes it illegal fo r an employer to fail or refuse to hire or 
discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to 
compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment be cause of an individual's race, color, 
religion, sex, or national origin.  
So we pretty much reduced that to the big four. Sex, also gende r, religion, race, and national origin. The 
other thing that Title VII prohi bits is you cannot limit, segre gate, or classify employees or applicants for 
employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive tha t individual of employment 
opportunities, or otherwise adversely affect their status as an  employee because of the individual's race, 
religion, gender, or national origin. So let's talk about each one of those separately.   
4 Chapter 2 
Sexual Harassment 
Introduction to Red/Yellow/Green Scenarios 
I'm going to walk you through a scenario. And I want you to con sider the scenario in terms of a traffic 
light and the colors red, yellow , and green. When you consider the facts that are presented, think about 
whether red, you'd stop. You'd say this is not behavior anyone should be engaging in . This appears to be 
harassing, discriminatory, retaliatory behavior. 
Then in terms of yellow, yellow is possibly, well, I might need  more information. Or, well, it could be 
OK, depending on context. Or, we ll, it could be OK based on tha t particular company's culture. And last 
but not least, green, which is where you say, no problem here. Full speed ahead. I don't see any concerns. 
Not going to stop the behavior. 
So now that you've gotten the idea of how to think about the sc enarios. Let's start with a scenario for you 
to consider. 
Sexual Harassment 
Let's consider a scenario unde r Title VII focused on sex harass ment. John, an underwriting technician, 
persists in asking Joan, another underwriting technician in his  department, out to dinner, even though she 
turns him down each and every time he requests a date. Would yo u consider this a red situation, a yellow 
situation, or green situation? 
If you selected red, you're probably relying on that notion of no means no and it does. No certainly means 
no. So in this case, we know without a shadow of a doubt that J ohn has asked Joan out several times and 
she has turned him down several times. What we don't know is ne cessarily how often he's done it, how 
frequently he's done it, necessarily is it once a month, once a  week, every day, and these are things that 
may cause people to not believe this is a red situation, but a lot of times this would be a red situation. 
Now, if you chose yellow, you probably wanted more information.  You probably wanted to know, how 
often was John really asking Joan out? Did he do it daily? Did he do it weekly? Did he do it monthly? A 
lot of people also want to know , well, how did Joan necessarily  say, I don't want to go out with you? Did 
she give a fairly lame excuse and say, my mother's coming into town. Next week my friends and I are 
going to a movie. We already made those plans. The week after, the proverbial, I need to wash my hair. 
Now, no always means no, but a lot of times, people try to be g entle in how they deal with someone who's 
interested in them, who they're not interested in, and so she m ay not have been clear in her intent to not be 
interested in John in a romantic way. Again, does this mean he gets to harass her? Absolutely not, but 
there are times when people need  to be direct with a colleague and there's times when people don't get a 
gentle hint . So in this particul ar case, if Joan feels that Jo hn is really making her uncomfortable, she 
should report it to human resour ces and she should ask for thei r assistance if she doesn't feel comfortable 
saying to John directly, I'm just not into you. 
If you selected green, you're probably looking at this in the b roader social context and saying, well, if you 
don't meet your spouse in college, you're going to meet them at  work, but in this case, you have to know 
whether John is necessarily being very persistent in asking Joa n out and whether John is necessarily 
harassing her, perhaps stalking her, making her feel very uncom fortable.  
5 But most people look at this and say, we're grownups. Deal with  it. Be able to look at John and say, I'm 
not interested, thank you very much, so that he can move on, bu t again, not required. So in the world of 
harassment discrimination in the world of sex harassment polici es, what you need to make sure to do is 
understand that if Joan is feeli ng uncomfortable, Joan should b e able to either tell John I'm not interested 
or if she can't do that, go to HR. 
Let me provide you with a little m ore information about John an d Joan. What if John invites Joan to a 
great dinner at Del Frisco's Double Eagle Steakhouse, a very ni ce place with a very high price tag and 
Joan decides she's going to go out with John, as he seems like a nice guy, a little dull, but nice and during 
dinner she realizes he's really not her type and she'd rather k eep him in the friend zone. 
They have a nice dinner, they part amicably, and John asks her out again after the Del Frisco's dinner. 
Joan turns him down and John start sending Joan flowers to the office for the next few weeks and Joan 
does not speak with John and she avoids him whenever she sees h im coming. How do you view John 
sending Joan the flowers, even af ter having been turned down? D o you believe this is a red situation, a 
yellow situation, or a green situation? 
If you picked red, most likely you're still of the belief or yo u've come to the belief that no means no and 
that Joan has made her desire t o not see John as a romantic par tner pretty clear, because after John starts 
sending flowers, usually the response when you are receptive to  that would be, why, thank you and let's 
go out again. Instead, John doesn't seem to be getting the hint . 
So this is the type of situation where Joan would either say to  John, really not interested in you, thank you 
very much, and if he doesn't get the hint, she can go on to HR or she doesn't have to approach John at all, 
because Title VII doesn't require t hat, nor does the case law t hat governs Title VII require someone to 
confront the person . Joan can go to HR and seek their assistanc e and say, it's just making me 
uncomfortable. 
Now if you picked yellow in this case, you may be looking at wh ether Joan has been clear in her 
intentions to John, but when all is said and done, that doesn't  really matter, because what matters in the 
world of harassment is Joan's perception of John's activity . I f she perceives this as him harassing her and 
wanting a romantic relationship and wanting to continue engagin g with her when she doesn't want to 
engage with him, then that's the type of situation that HR will  likely get involved, but a lot of people pick 
yellow, because they still want Joan to be able to confront Joh n directly, but again, there's no requirement 
that says Joan has to do that a nd again, she can seek HRs assis tance. 
If you picked green in this situation, you are probably of the mindset that these are two grown adults, they 
need to work it out. Not necessar ily true in the world of Title  VII. In this case, John is pursuing Joan, 
because he is interested in a romantic relationship with her. S o gender, sex come into play. So in this kind 
of case where Joan is not reciprocating John's affection, it's not necessarily appropriate for him to 
continue seeking a relationship when she has sent him no clear message that she's interested. 
Now, if Joan reports John's conduc t to HR, what can risk manage ment do to assist? Well in this case, risk 
management can get involved to make sure that there are no othe r issues that are going on of which 
they're not aware. Perhaps the s ituation between Joan and John has impacted the rest of the unit and risk 
management may need to deal with s ome morale training, some tea m building, and things like that, 
because John's conduct is not necessarily severe or pervasive. 
It's not the type of conduct that's necessarily going to get hi m terminated. So that means Joan and John are 
probably going to have to conti nue working together in some way , in some fashion. As we all know, 
underwriters are not the easiest p eople to come by. So since th ey're both underwriting technicians and 
they're both going to probably be continuing to work together, even after a report to HR, what is it that 
you can do to assist?  
6 Again, take into account how you may be able to informally chat  with people and say, how's it going? Do 
you feel things are good? How do you feel the morale of the tea m is? The other thing you can do is 
participate in any training. The re may be a need to engage in c ompany-wide harassment, discrimination, 
and retaliation training and there may be a need to meet with J ohn periodically, so that you assist HR in 
saying, well John, you understa nd the rules. You understand Joa n doesn't feel comfortable. How are you 
doing? Do you have any questions o r concerns? How is the relati onship going with the rest of the team? 
These are things you can do to m ake sure that not only morale i s kept at an appropriate level, but that 
compliance is at the forefront of your company culture and by a ssisting with HR, you can absolutely help 
to make sure that the company's policies and procedures are bei ng followed and that team morale and a 
sense of camaraderie can remain intact, despite this bump in th e road.  
7 Chapter 3 
Sex and Religion Harassment 
Sex and Religion Harassment 
Gonna provide you with another scenario under Title VII. This o ne involves sex harassment and a few 
other issues. So let's start w ith our friend Terry, who's a mai ntenance supervisor at a factory. He has 
several calendars featuring scantily clad women on his cubicle wall, with some dating back to 2014, 
which can all easily be seen whenever you're in Terry's office.  
Is this a red situation, a yello w situation, or a green situati on? If you selected red, I'm sure you thought 
you didn't want to be subjected to cleavage let alone other thi ngs that you will necessarily see in such 
calendars, whenever you go into Terry's office. And the fact th at he's got some dating back to 2014 
probably makes you a little uncomfortable as well. Why has it b een posted since 2014? Why hasn't 
someone addressed it? 
Well, maybe they haven't addressed it because they're uncomfort able. Maybe they haven't addressed it 
because they're afraid of what Te rry may do or say. And maybe t hey haven't addressed it because they 
didn't realize that they could or should. But this is the type of situation that someone could easily be 
offended by being confronted w ith numerous photos of scantily c lad women in calendars that are right in 
front of you and purposely so. 
So, if you picked yellow, you're probably wondering, well, if t his is a maintenance supervisor, is this 
perhaps a cultural thing? Is this  something that everybody in m aintenance is fine with? Is this something 
that the company doesn't have an issue with because they're not  naked, they're in bikinis. They're in t-
shirts, they're in short shorts. So that's something you can ha ve when you go to certain restaurants. 
So a lot of people look at that  and say, well get a sense of hu mor. Or it's not really that big of a deal. But 
remember, let's go back to Title VII and the perception of what  the perceived victim feels is the only 
perception that matters. 
The intent of the person, such as Terry, doesn't matter. It's w hat the person who is being exposed to it, 
who feels offended or feels harassed, their perception matters.  
So if you picked green, you're probably thinking, what's the co rporate culture? This isn't a problem. The 
women aren't naked. They're in clothing, they're in bikinis. Yo u don't see an issue. 
Now again, whether you see the i ssue doesn't matter. It's whate ver someone who's in Terry's office is 
necessarily feeling. And if they feel harassed, or if they feel  it's inappropriate to be looking at calendars 
and seeing a whole lot of skin, then that person has the right to say, this concerns me. I'm not comfortable. 
So this is probably not a green situation. 
So let's think about Terry again. Would you feel differently if  instead of waitresses in  bikinis, Terry has a 
picture of his stunning wife Melissa in a white bikini, wearing  a lei in front of a waterfall in Hawaii from 
his honeymoon last year? Is this a red situation, a yellow situ ation, or a green situation. 
If you picked red, you probably did so based on the fact that s howing that much cleavage and that much 
skin doesn't matter if it's Terry 's wife. It doesn't matter if it's someone he doesn't know in a calendar. The 
answer is you think it's not appropriate to necessarily have pi ctures like that on display at work.  
8 And you could be right. It, again, depends on the perception of  the person who is looking at all that skin 
and all that cleavage and whether they feel comfortable or not.  Not whether Terry feels comfortable. And 
not whether Terry had a fabul ous honeymoon and his wife looks g reat in the bikini. The perception of the 
person who's looking at the picture of Melissa in the bikini ma tters. If you picked yellow, you probably 
were wavering on whether it made  a difference as to a stranger in a bikini versus Terry 's wife in a bikini. 
And you're wavering on, well, it's a family picture. Why should  that offend anybody? 
Well, Melissa is still in a bikini. There's a lot of skin being  shown. And there's a lot of people who don't 
feel that's necessarily appropriate for the workplace. So even though it's a lovely picture of his wife-- she's 
in a waterfall, it makes him ha ppy to look at that photo and re minisce about his honeymoon-- you could 
still be in a situation where someone feels uncomfortable looki ng at Melissa in that bikini. 
If you chose green, you are probably relying on the fact that y ou view a family photograph very 
differently than you do photos of strangers. And you also belie ve that it's probably not nearly as large as 
some of the calendar photos that you may be confronted with. An d you don't have any problem with 
Terry having a photograph of his wife Melissa from their honeym oon on his desk, because you, too, have 
family photos on your desk. 
But do you have family photos of you in a Speedo and your wife in a bikini on your d esk? Those are the 
sort of things that, again, you need to consider, on whether it 's OK to be showing skin and cleavage. And 
does it really matter that it's a relative as compared to a str anger?  
9 Chapter 4 
Religion and National Origin/Race Harassment 
Religion and National Ori gin/Race Harassment 
Remember our maintenance supervisor, Terry? I'm going to switch  the facts around a little bit for you. 
What if instead of pictures of bik ini-clad women in posters and  calendars, or of his wife Melissa, Terry 
has several large framed posters of the following-- John 3:16--  For God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten son that whosoe ver believeth in him should no t perish but have an everlasting life. His 
next framed poster says, Jesus loves you. And his third framed poster says, I can do all things through 
Christ who strengthens me. 
Is this a red situation, a yello w situation, or a green situati on? If you picked red, you were listening to the 
protected categories under Title VII, which include religion. T erry's religion may not be the religion of 
someone who is visiting his office. And they're being confronte d with large posters telling them that Jesus 
loved them and that they can do all things through Christ, when  that person may be Buddhist or have an 
entirely different religion. It could be very uncomfortable for  the person sitting in Terry's office. They 
may feel judged by Terry if they don't share the same beliefs. 
A lot of people confuse the f act that you can have your beliefs , you can have your opinions, but sharing 
them at the workplace is not protected activity. You lose your First Amendment rights when you walk in 
your employer's door. The First Amendment applies to the public  square. So, in this case if you picked 
red, you were definitely thinking  about the perspective of the person who walks into Terry's office, is 
confronted with these religious posters, may not agree, and may  feel uncomfortable. This would be a 
report to HR moment because it's very unlikely that Terry is go ing to voluntarily remove those posters. 
If you picked yellow, you were probably trying to decide. Well,  if he can have pictures of his wife in a 
bikini, why can't he have pictures saying I believe in God, I b elieve in Christ, I believe that Christ 
strengthens me? Is that necessarily a problem? Well, if you wor ked for the YMCA, it wouldn't be. They 
are the Young Men's Christian Association after all. But if you  think about the fact that most 
organizations are secular in na ture and they don't have a relig ious basis, the fact that you're walking into a 
maintenance supervisor's office and having to be confronted wit h religious posters  could be a moment 
where the person feels uncomfortable and they may not be able t o express, well, maybe I don't want to 
meet in Terry's office because I have to look at those posters . A lot of people again, think, well he has the 
right to believe in his religion. We live in the United States of America. He absolutely does. But to 
proselytize at work is not a right he's guaranteed under the Co nstitution. 
If you picked green, you're probably thinking I live in the Uni ted States. I can have freedom of religion. 
Isn't that one of the things guaranteed to me? And then you hea rd in Title VII, I don't have to deal with 
religious discrimination. And I think I'm being discriminated a gainst if I'm told I can't have these posters. 
 
   
10 Let's go back to the notion of w hat it is to be in a workplace and what it is to be in a professional 
workplace where Title VII necessarily applies. And that is peop le have the right to work in an 
environment free of discriminati on and harassment. So if you ha ppen to be Buddhist and you happen to 
walk into Terry's office and sit down and the first thing you s ee is, I believe that God and Christ 
strengthen me, and you get the impression that if you don't bel ieve that Terry's going to treat you 
differently, that's going to impact your work relationship. It' s also going to make the Buddhist necessarily 
feel uncomfortable. So this is the kind of situation that HR is  most likely going to get involved. 
So let's take that situation a step further. Hasan Kain, a Musl im coworker of Terry's, tells HR that he has 
been in Terry's office and it do es make him uncomfortable to ha ve small team meetings in Terry's office, 
as the Christian posters make him feel unwelcome and less value d, as he does not believe Jesus loves him 
nor does he believe Christ will he lp him do all things or stren gthen him. He has a different set of beliefs 
and values. He has respect for Terry and how he necessarily lea ds as maintenance supervisor. But these 
posters make him feel uncomfortable. 
HR speaks with Terry who reluctantly takes down his framed piec es. Shortly thereafter, Hasan starts 
finding Bible verses tucked under his wiper blades. And he's no  longer invited to the group lunch the team 
has every Friday. Is this a red,  yellow, or green moment regard ing the Bible verses and regarding the 
group lunch? 
So if you picked red and you said this is a stop, this should n ot be happening moment, you're probably 
right. Because Terry being in charg e of the group has to keep i n mind that Hasan is still part of the group. 
So why is Hasan not being invite d to the group lunch the team h as every Friday? What changed? Well, 
the only thing we know of that changed is our spoke with Terry and told him to take down his posters. So 
the fact that Hasan seems to be frozen out after that happened would be an adverse employment action. 
And you're right. This is a stop moment. This should not be hap pening. 
If you picked yellow, you proba bly wanted to know a little bit more information, such as who's actually 
putting the Bible verses under Hasan's wiper blades. Is it Terr y? Is it somebody else in the group? Is it 
somebody else who just happens to be doing that for everybody a t the company? But that notion of the 
group lunch that the team has every Friday and Hasan being no l onger invited that's a problem. 
Now you may want to know more, a nd that's why you picked yellow . You may want to know, well, is this 
a formal lunch? Is this the group always has lunch. Or is this an informal, hey, we're going to go to this 
place for lunch. Why don't you join us? 
If you picked green, you probably are of the mindset that, hey,  I don't have to invite anybody to lunch 
who I don't want to. And you prob ably said, well, whoever's tuc king Bible verses under his window wiper 
blades, no big deal. It is a big  deal. Because Hasan has made i t clear that he is not a Christian. He believes 
in Islam. And he has a different value system, as well as a dif ferent belief. 
At no time have we mentioned that Hasan is not a good employee,  that he doesn't get along with his 
coworkers. So the fact that he made a complaint about the relig ious posters and then is being subjected to 
Bible verses under his wiper blades and being disinvited to the  group lunch, this is a problem. And HR 
needs to get involved again. 
So we're back to Terry. We're b ack to Hasan. We're back to the fact that he's not being invited to lunch, 
and those Bible verses continue to appear on his windshield. Th en someone uses a Sharpie to write a 
racial slur on his locker. Is th is is a red, yellow, or green s ituation? 
 
    
11 I'm sure at this point those of you who picked red are feeling very comfortable with your red, saying this 
is a stop moment. This should not be happening. Anytime we get a racial slur or an ethnic slur written on 
someone's locker, or someone's c ar, or on someone's chair, that 's when we know we have a serious 
problem. Because at this point we don't know who's doing it, an d we not only have a culture issue, but we 
have a legal issue. And that is Hasan has the right to work in a discrimination-free environment. And now 
we have not only Bible verses, not being invited to lunch, but now we have a racial or ethnic slur written 
on his locker. So this is definitely a moment for HR to get inv olved and risk management to get involved 
to see what it is they can do to  stop the situation from contin uing to escalate. 
If you chose yellow, you're probably still seeking additional i nformation. You want to know who's putting 
those Bible verses on Hasan's windshield and why is it that he' s no longer being invited to lunch. Maybe 
he said something that offended somebody else. Maybe he's datin g somebody's ex-girlfriend. We don't 
know. And so you're the curious type who wants a little bit mor e information. 
But the fact that someone wrote a racial or ethnic slur on Hasa n's locker, that gets us more into a red 
moment than a yellow moment. And HR will be certain to get invo lved. 
For those of you that chose green, you're probably still of the  belief that boys will be boys, or perhaps, 
you know what? This is something that they need to deal with wi thout getting the company involved. And 
that's not an assumption that's going to help save your company  or save your company's bottom line. 
Because Title VII provides Hasan w ith a discrimination and hara ssment-free workplace. So even though 
you still may be on the fence here on the Bible verses or his n ot being invited to lunch, but there's no 
being on the fence regarding racial slurs being written on Hasa n's locker. This is definitely a moment for 
HR to get involved. 
OK. Hasan has had a lot of probl ems in the past few weeks since  he asked Terry to-- well he asked HR to 
have Terry put the posters down . So let's talk about what prote cted categories we have in this situation. 
We possibly have race. We're not sure. Hasan may have converted  to Islam and changed his name. We 
possibly may have national origin in that he may be from a coun try where Islam is the predominant 
religion. 
But we do know that we have a problem with religious discrimina tion under Title VII. And we have a 
retaliation cause of action, becau se it appears that Hasan is s uffering from an adverse employment action 
due to having made a complaint. And when that happens, you also  have an additional cause of action. 
And remember, Title VII not only protects you from harassment a nd discrimination, it protects you from 
retaliation for having complained about being treated different ly based on a protected category. 
So what can you as risk do to help the company in being able to  resolve this troubling situation? One of 
the things you might want to consider doing is monitoring or in stalling surveillance cameras . Because 
you want to make sure that if anyone is writing racial or ethni c slurs, that stops immediately. You want to 
know who's doing it. You also might want to know who's continui ng to tuck those Bible verses under 
Hasan's window shield. Because that may give you an idea of whe ther it is someone on the maintenance 
team or whether it's someone tota lly different who just may fee l like they need to proselytize and they 
figure Hasan is a good target. 
You also want to look at particip ating in team building or dive rsity training. You want to work with HR 
and legal. Because you want to be able to put an emphasis on co mpliance. You want to put an emphasis 
on we do the right thing. Becau se if you don't, we all know wha t's coming next. And that's an EEOC 
charge. That's what's coming next . And that's where you know wi thout a shadow of a doubt, not only will 
the company's bottom line be imp acted because attorney's fees w ill mount as a result of an EEOC charge, 
but you'll continue to have possible morale issues, and culture  issues, and team issues as people may side 
up as team Terry or team Hasan, and say, well, you need to do t his differently. You need to perceive this 
in a different way.  
12 And you're going to have a whole lot of drama when the answer i s, let's try and figure this out now. 
Because up till now, Terry hasn't n ecessarily been a problem em ployer for you and neither has Hasan. So 
let's see what we can do to put the company back on the right t rack and reinforce that culture of 
compliance.  
13 Chapter 5 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 
Let's talk about the Americans  with Disabilities Act, otherwise  known as the ADA. The ADA is a civil 
rights law that prohibits discrimination against individuals wi th disabilities in all areas of public life, 
including jobs, schools, transpor tation, and all public and pri vate places that are open to the general 
public. The purpose of the law is to make sure that people with  disabilities have the same rights and 
opportunities as everyone else. So the ADA gives civil rights p rotections to qualified individuals with 
disabilities, similar to those provided to individuals under Ti tle VII on the basis of race, sex, national 
origin, or religion. 
It also guarantees equal opportuni ty for an individual with a d isability and making sure that they can 
receive appropriate state and local government services, teleco mmunications, and transportation. So let's 
go back and talk about the ADA in  general and let's talk about the fact that, do you remember the last 
time you went to a movie theater and you walked in and you got to your seat. Did you actually take stairs 
to get halfway through or did you walk in on a ramp and the ram p led you to a very wide row with 
wheelchair seating? Probably di dn't pay attention, because it's  become such a part of your life that it's 
normal. 
Same is true if you've been to a concert or a football game, an y sort of stadium activity. You walk in 
through a ramp or you walk in through one of those ramps that g oes up and up and up in a circle like the 
Guggenheim. That's because instead  of stairs, people with crutc hes, wheelchairs, and other disabilities can 
have an easier time of it, because ramps are appropriate and ra mps permit access to things that, otherwise, 
people with disabilities wouldn't have and every bathroom you'v e been in lately for any larger 
establishment that's not historic, you'll probably notice that there's a handicapped bathroom. 
These things have become such a part of our daily life, we don' t even think about them. We don't think 
about the fact that when you step off a sidewalk at the end of a curb, it's not a curb at that point, it's a 
ramp. It's been graded down. 
These are the things that show t hat sometimes civil rights acts  work and the ADA is definitely at work on 
a daily basis as far as public accommodations and making sure t hat people with disabilities can enjoy 
movies and stadium activities and to be able to get into variou s businesses to enjoy the same things as 
people who don't have disabilities get to do without having to think about, well, where do I park? How do 
I get up those steps? How do I na vigate that curb? So these are  the things that the ADA protects in 
general, but we're going to focus on what the ADA protects in t he employment context. 
   
  
14 ADA Scenarios 
I'm going to present you now w ith an ADA scenario. And we're go ing to start with Becca. Becca is a 
proud veteran of the Gulf War. S he's also an amputee starting a t her left thigh, and she wears a modern 
prosthesis. She believes in keepi ng fit and is a regular at the  company's gym. She has shared with 
colleagues that she's training for her first Wounded Warrior Tr iathlon, and she's very excited about it. 
And her colleagues are very supportive of her engaging in this event. 
Becca tells HR that she's havi ng issues getting up to the third  floor, which is where her department and 
team are located, as the elevator is constantly out of order in  the building. And she simply can't get up and 
down three flights of stairs regularly. So she asked to have a desk on the first floor, and have conferences 
scheduled for the first-floor conference room instead of the th ird-floor conference room. 
So does the company have to acco mmodate Becca's request to have  her desk moved to the first floor, and 
to have conferences be scheduled  on the first floor? If you bel ieve that this is a reasonable request, you 
need to consider green. If you're not sure, you might want to c onsider yellow. And if you think, no way 
does the company have to do this, think about red. 
So if you chose red, you were pr obably focused on the fact that  Becca is fit. And we talked about her 
being a regular at the company's gym. And you're probably think ing, well, if she can go to the gym every 
day, and she can train for a triathlon, why can't she get up an d down the stairs? 
Well, that's not a decision we get to make. Becca is obviously a person with a disability. She has a 
prosthesis. Something that we can see is something we know. It' s not a question of whether she has a 
disability. 
What you're questioning, if you picked red, is whether she need s the accommodation to have her desk 
moved from the third floor to the first floor. And where everyb ody else might need to be inconvenienced 
to come from the third floor to  the first floor to accommodate Becca. So if you're focused on-- well, she's 
training for a triathlon, she should be going up and down the s tairs-- you're not focused on the right thing. 
What you need to focu s on is whether Becca's request is reasona ble, and whether the company can 
accommodate her request without undu e hardship to the company. In this case, she's asking to be moved. 
And, yes, it may inhibit some of the teamwork. But a trip to Wa lmart will probably achieve the purchase 
of a desk, if there isn't an additional one at the company. And  asking for what is probably a weekly 
conference to be held downstairs is probably not that big of a deal. 
It's not necessarily going to impact the company. It's not goin g to cause hardship to the company. And it's 
certainly not going to cost them any money. 
Yes, I understand you're still th inking about, what about the t eam? And the cohesiveness of the team? 
And the ability of the team to in teract with each other with Be cca downstairs? Well, that's something 
everyone's going to have to learn how to address and accommodat e. 
Now, if you picked yellow, you were probably focused on the fac t that Becca is very physically fit. She 
attends the gym regularly. And , again, she's thinking, I'm goin g to train for a Wounded Warrior Triathlon. 
So you're thinking her physical  fitness level may not warrant a  request to be granted that her desk be 
moved from the third floor to the first floor. So you're not su re as to whether the company needs to 
accommodate Becca's request. But you're also not sure that the company doesn't have to do that. You may 
want a little bit more informati on. You may want to understand what the impact will be of moving 
Becca's desk from the top floor to the bottom floor, as far as how that impacts the company's resources 
and how that may impact the team. 
But what we need to focus on is  whether Becca is a qualified in dividual with a disability. In this case, yes, 
she has an obvious disability. So is her request reasonable? Is  it reasonable to say, move my desk from the 
top floor to the bottom floor because I cannot get up and down those steps?  
15 And, last but not least, what is t he cost to the company? Is th is an undue hardship for them to move Becca 
from the top floor to the bottom floor? In most cases, the answ er to that will be no. But if you picked 
yellow, you probably want to kn ow a little bit more about how t he company's space is necessarily 
handled. But again, if it's a reasonable request, and it's an i nconsequential cost to the company, Becca's 
request should be accommodated. 
If you picked green, you were focused on Becca and the fact tha t she's requested an accommodation. And 
you believe that her request is probably reasonable. You're not  focused on how physically fit she is. 
You're not focused on her traini ng for a triathlon. You're focu sed on the fact that you have an amputee 
who is saying, the elevator do esn't work most of the time, and I have a hard time getting up and down the 
stairs regularly. 
Again, it's not our decision as risk managers and human resourc e professionals and, frankly, as 
individuals to say, well, Becca, y ou should, you know, suck it up a little bit and figure out how to get up 
and down the stairs. Becca obviously has a disability. She's re questing an accommodation. That 
accommodation is reasonable, as far as it doesn't seem to be pa rticularly costly in saying, well, move her 
desk to the bottom floor. And, if you're having a team meeting on a weekly basis, move that to the bottom 
floor. So in this case, green was probably your best answer. 
So, as risk managers, when yo u think about reasonable accommoda tions, what would be a reasonable 
accommodation in Becca's case? Is it reasonable to propose that  Becca move her chair and her desk to the 
bottom floor? Most of us will probably say, well, it doesn't se em to be an unreasonable request. It 
certainly isn't a pricey request , thinking if the only cost is going to be the purchase of a new desk, if the 
company doesn't have one. That would be a reasonable accommodat ion. 
So when you think about what you need to do when you are consid ering a reasonable accommodation 
from a qualified individual with  a disability, you need to thin k of these magic words. How can we help 
you? It's one of the few times in employment law we do have mag ic words. Most of the  time, we have to 
sit there, shake our heads, and think about it, just the same a s anybody else. 
But when you're dealing with a qualified individual who's askin g for a reasonable accommodation so that 
their disability doesn't impact their ability to contribute, yo u ask, how can we help you? And you balance 
the needs of the company with the individual's request. So as r isk management, how  do you assist with 
Becca's particular issue? 
Well, number one, you're going to  look at the space issues. Num ber two, you're going to look at, well, 
what's the cost of a desk? And that's going to be nominal at be st. And number three, you're going to look 
at the impact on the team, and how would you necessarily assist  with reducing that impact? 
Is there a way to think about Skype meetings, or webinars, or G oTo web meetings, so that Becca can 
participate in impromptu conferences and calls? Or is there a w ay to say, we're going to set up sort of a 
regular meeting, so that even though you may not have a weekly meeting on every Friday morning, you're 
going to have a Thursday lunch, so that everyone can have a cha nce to interact, and the team morale 
remains high, and the team's ab ility to work well with each oth er also remains high. 
So what about the feasibility of moving the entire team to a di fferent floor? That may be something to 
consider as well. As to whether t he entire team could be reloca ted from the third floor to the first floor. 
And some of the people on the first floor could be located to t he third floor, because they may not have 
someone who needs the reasonable accommodation that Becca has r equested. So, again, what kind of 
hardship would this be to the company, to engage in the analysi s of move this group of people this way, 
this group of people that way? 
As risk, that's going to be one  of your jobs. And one of the va lue adds you have to the company is how do 
you balance the company's needs with Becca's needs?  
16 Now, what if the company declines Becca's request, because they  just don't believe that she needs it? Or 
they don't believe that they're going to be able to rearrange t he space on the first floor? Or they don't 
believe that there's any way to m ove the entire team from the t hird floor to the first floor and move a team 
from the first floor to the third floor? 
And you find out a month later that Becca actually did engage i n a triathlon. She placed second in her age 
group. She was very proud. Her team members were very proud of her. It's common knowledge 
throughout the company that she ran the triathlon. She placed s econd. And she has described her 
experience to many people. 
And she meets with HR that same month and says, I'm making a co mplaint that I believe I'm being treated 
differently at work due to my  disability. Because she still has n't been accommodated. She's still having to 
go up and down those steps. And she's still feeling that she ne eds a reasonable accommodation in order to 
be able to perform her work. Is Becca's making a complaint to H R a red, yellow, or green situation? In 
other words, is the conduct she' s describing, as far as feeling  treated differently, a moment where you say, 
stop, we need to address Becca's complaint? Yellow, not sure. O r green, no problem, we don't need to 
address her complaint. 
So, if you picked red, and you said, stop, we need to make sure  that we're considering balancing the 
company's needs with Becca's need for a reasonable accommodatio n, think you've picked the right 
category. Because even though we are probably a little distract ed by the fact that she did very well in her 
triathlon-- she placed second in h er age group-- it doesn't mea n that she can regularly go up and down 
three flights of stairs. She's asking again to be accommodated at work due to an obvious disability. So, in 
this particular case, as risk man agement, you're looking at pro tecting the company's bottom line. 
And let's think about a disabled Gulf veteran who's asking simp ly to have her desk moved in front of a 
jury. We have a sympathetic pla intiff. We have someone who the jury is probably going to admire and 
respect. And the fact that she ra n a triathlon and placed secon d is probably something they're going to 
commend her for, as compared to say, well, if you could do that , you can get up and down three flights of 
stairs. 
So this is the type of situation where risk management needs to  be involved. And they need to be asking 
HR, and asking the company in g eneral, how can we help Becca an d balance the needs of the company at 
the same time? 
If you picked yellow, you're proba bly wondering, well, she plac ed second in the triathlon. What are we 
going to do? She placed second, s o why can't she go up and down  three flights of stairs? Well, we don't 
know. And we don't actually get to decide that for Becca. Becca  is telling us, I am having a problem. I'm a 
qualified individual with a di sability. I need an accommodation  to be able to do my job. 
And we don't necessarily need to c onsider what she's doing outs ide of work, or whether that triathlon 
impacts her ability to go up and down three flights of stairs r egularly, because even though a triathlon 
involves running, doesn't involve running up and down stairs. S o the people who picked yellow probably 
wanted to know a little bit more i nformation about why it is th at Becca continues to feel that a reasonable 
accommodation will help her do he r work better, and how it is t hat that accommodation is necessary 
because of her ability or inabilit y to walk up and down three f lights of stairs. 
So if you picked green, I have no doubt you were focused on Bec ca's second place finish in a triathlon. 
And you were continuing to hold onto the belief that if she can  run a triathlon, she can go up and down 
three flights of stairs. Again , that's not a decision that we n ecessarily get to make. We're not Becca. We're 
not the person who has a disab ility who is asking for a reasona ble accommodation to do her work. 
We aren't the ones who have said, I really do need this. I don' t understand why I can't have a desk 
elsewhere, and why it's that big of a deal for the company to p rovide her a desk on the bottom floor and 
engage in team meetings-- whic h are not that frequent-- on the bottom floor when she asks for it.  
17 So, how do you as a risk manager get involved in protecting the  company in a situation such as this? 
Well, let's start with the basi cs. As risk management, you're u sually in charge of facilities management. 
Did you think about trying to force the issue of getting the el evator fixed? Or start off with that very basic 
issue of maybe that'll solve the problem all the way around. 
And you won't have to worry about, well, how do we keep the tea m intact? And how do we deal with the 
logistics of moving an entire team from the third floor to the first floor-- if that's the decision that's made-- 
and displacing a team from the first floor to the third floor? Or how you deal with webinars, and how you 
deal with Skype, and how you deal with other video conferencing ? 
So these are the sort of basic issues that you want to look at and say, is there a simp le solution that goes 
beyond having to engage in the interactive dialogue, and doing a whole lot of rigmarole to make sure that 
a qualified individual with a di sability gets what they need to  perform their job? So if it's going to be too 
expensive for this year's bu dget to necessarily fix the elevato r, then you want to get involved in protecting 
the company to say, well, let's  work with Becca. Let's see what  it is she needs. Let's see if we can reduce 
the amount of time she has to go up and down the stairs. 
Why is it she has to go up and down the stairs regularly? Is sh e OK with going up and down the stairs 
once to get to work, once to leave work? Has anybody had this c onversation with Becca, to find out what 
exactly it is that she needs, a nd how it is that you or the com pany can look at her and say, how can we 
help you, and mean it, and make it happen.  
18 Chapter 6 
Pregnancy Discrimination 
Pregnancy Discrimination 
Let's talk about another protected category, pregnancy. Title V II was amended to prohibit sex 
discrimination on the basis of pregnancy. So we have the Pregna ncy Discrimination Act. 
The terms because of sex, or on the basis of sex, include, but are not limited to, because of or on the basis 
of pregnancy, childbirth, or re lated medical conditions; and wo men affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or 
related medical conditions shall be treated the same for all em ployment related purposes, including 
receipt of benefits under fringe b enefit programs, as other per sons not so affected but similar in their 
ability or inability to work. A nd nothing in the act necessaril y shall be interpreted to permit otherwise. So 
pregnancy is pretty much a but f or standard, in that but for th e pregnancy, the decisions wouldn't be made. 
So now we're going to take a look at a scenario involving pregn ancy. 
Let's talk about Mindy. She's an employee who works in the ware house as a picker gather, gathering 
items for packages. She announces to  her team that she is three  months pregnant, and she's excited to be 
having a Christmas baby. She r eassured her coworkers that she'd  be back to work early in the new year. 
Mindy's always been a reliable employee, hardworking, and very encouraging to her coworkers. But she's 
also not afraid to call someone out when they're not pulling th eir weight. The company had been 
internally looking at options to give Mindy training opportunit ies in order to promote her to a team leader 
supervisory position. Again, she 's impressed both her colleague s and management. 
With Mindy's announcement that she's due to give birth during t he busiest time of the  year, the Christmas 
holiday, the company gives the team lead supervisory position t o Fred, a longtime employee who has 
repeatedly expressed interest in  making advancements in his car eer with the company. Is the company's 
offer of the job to Fred a red stop moment, a yellow maybe it's  OK, or green a no problem moment? 
If you picked red, you were probably focused on the fact that M indy seemed to be well regarded, that the 
company had clearly been grooming her for a supervisory positio n, and that it seemed like her 
announcement that she'd be giving birth during the busy holiday  season impacted their decision to not 
promote her and instead promote Fred. So this is the sort of de cision that risk management should 
probably be involved in to be abl e to ensure that not only will  the needs during the busy holiday season be 
met, but whether they have the right team leader in place. 
If you picked yellow, you probably wanted to know more informat ion about Fred. We heard a lot about 
Mindy. We heard that she was reliable, hardworking, and well re spected not only by colleagues but by 
management. But we don't know  a whole lot about Fred. 
We know he's a long-term employee. We know he's expressed an in terest in having a promotion, but do 
we know how he's regarded by ot her people? Do we know that he h as the respect of his colleagues and 
management like Mindy does? And you probably want to know more about that before you say yeah, 
don't think it was a good idea to promote Fred, or a no, Fred w as a fine candidate. He's the right man for 
the job. 
If you picked green, you're probably thinking it's not a proble m. Fred is a long-term employee who 
repeatedly expressed interest. If the company thought he was qu alified, then he's qualified.  
19 They made a decision based on the needs of the company. But we still have to consider whether that 
decision was made because Mindy w on't be there during the busy holiday season, or whether Fred was 
truly the best person for the job. So that's still to be a caut ionary note to picking green in this particular 
situation. 
As a risk manager, what do you want to know about the company's  decision to pick Fred for the position 
instead of Mindy? Do you want t o know about Fred's managerial s kills? Do you want to know about his 
people skills in general? Do yo u want to know how he is thought  of with his coworkers? Do you want to 
know if he's had decision-making ability in the past? Do you wa nt to know whether he has good rapport 
with the team that he's going to be leading? 
Do you want to have a better idea as to how he and Mindy get al ong? Do you want to know whether that 
department runs well because of F red's contributi ons, Mindy's c ontributions, or the entire team's 
contributions? Those are the thi ngs you really want to have an opportunity to explore as risk management, 
because together with HR, you can a lso decide how to best make sure the departments  are appropriately 
staffed. 
Now, would you have a different opinion as to the risk to the c ompany if you learned that the team that 
decided to give the job to Fred had made the following comments  to Mindy after her announcement of her 
Christmas baby? Mindy's supervisor stated to her in a staff mee ting that Mindy will never be able return 
to her job and leave her baby on ce that baby is placed in her a rms. Mindy's area manager, Alice, tells 
Mindy at lunch that babies need their mommy, and Mindy should c onsider staying home for a while. 
How are you feeling about the promotion for Fred at this point?  Are you still feeling that that's a red 
moment, a yellow moment, or a green moment that Fred was promot ed over Mindy based on these recent 
comments from management? 
Now if you picked red, and that you said OK this is a stop mome nt, this is we really don't need to think a 
whole lot about Fred at this point, because now we're concerned  about these pregnancy-specific 
comments that were made to Mindy . Does this put Mindy in a posi tion that she has a pregnancy 
discrimination claim? That but f or her pregnancy, would she hav e been promoted? Wou ld she have been 
given the team lead position? 
So if you're in the red position of saying no, no, no, no, no, we shouldn't have Fred at this point in a 
leadership position over Mindy based on the fact that her super visor, and her area manager, two people in 
a position to adversely affect Mindy's employment, not coworker s, commented to her about the fact that 
moms shouldn't be at work. 
If you picked yellow, you probably went well, Alice told her th is at lunch. They were at a social 
engagement. It wasn't necessarily related to work, and Alice wa s just sharing her personal opinion. 
But how do you feel about Mindy's supervisor at a staff meeting  commenting that her opinion is Mindy 
won't be back because once she sees that baby, she's not going back to work? You're probably wanting to 
know a little bit more about whether  that supervisor has said o ther comments in the past, particularly in a 
on the site, work context at a staff meeting. 
And if you said green, this still isn't a problem, you're not w orried about it. You might want to reconsider 
what the risks are, considering these were pregnancy-specific c omments made to a pregnant employee 
about her future career at the company.  
20 Chapter 7 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) 
Anyone over the age of 40 in the  United States is covered by th e Age Discrimination and Employment 
Act. This is an act that provides you with the ability to have the same opportunities as someone who's 39 
or under. That your age should not  be a factor in considering w hether you have employment 
opportunities, promotion opportunities, or anything related to how the workplace treats you as someone 
who's over the age of 40. 
The ADEA was passed in 1967 . And it protects applicants and em ployees 40 years of age from 
discrimination on the basis of their age in hiring, promotion, discharge, compensation, or terms, 
conditions, or privileges of employment. And that one is the on e that really gets tricky. Because a lot of 
times there can be ageist comments made in the workplace that d on't necessarily adversely impact 
someone's employment, but still may cause someone to feel as if  they're working in a hostile 
environment, and that their age is the reason that people are t reating them differently. 
The ADEA, like many of the issues we've talked about previously  with Title VII and the Pregnancy 
Discrimination Act, and the Americans with Disability Act, are enforced by the EEOC. So if you have 
someone who believes they've been  treated differently on the ba sis of their age, you can expect an EEOC 
charge .  
So let's talk about an age-related scenario in the workplace. J erry's been with your co mpany for 30 years. 
And he's turning 60 that same month. So Jerry's department plan s a surprise party to celebrate his 30th 
work anniversary and his 60th birthday. And they invited the en tire company to attend. Jerry's actually 
very popular. He's been a very g ood manager. People enjoy worki ng with him. And people are actually 
delighted to have a chance to celebrate his contributions to th e company.  
Jerry's very surprised when he w alks into the break room and se es his many coworkers there with black 
balloons and a large black cape that says "Over the Hill" on it , with scattered candy tombstones on the 
cake. Is this a red moment, a y ellow moment, or a green moment?  Should we stop and say, this should not 
be happening? Is this a, well, m aybe? Or is this a green, it's all good moment?  
So let's talk about red. There's a lot of people who are not co mfortable with aging. They're not particularly 
happy to be celebrating birthdays showing I'm getting older. Bu t in this particular case, do we know how 
Jerry feels? And that impacts tha t ability to say, is this a st op moment?  
But let's also take it that step further. Many coworkers were t here. They were there to celebrate Jerry and 
his contributions to the company as well as his birthday. Maybe  some of them were uncomfortable with 
the black balloons, and the over the hill, and the tombstones t heme. Maybe some of them will say, I feel 
uncomfortable, and I feel that my age was necessarily impacted as far as being treated differently because 
I'm older. So even if Jerry wasn't necessarily offended, maybe somebody who attended was. And that may 
turn this into a red moment.  
  
21 If you picked yellow, you probabl y wanted to know more about Je rry and whether this is the type of thing 
that he would welcome, and find funny, and find just a happy mo ment in, because all of his coworkers 
came together. And he's got a sense of humor, so the over the h ill cake didn't bother him. What about the 
corporate culture? Is this the kind of company that regularly c elebrates birthdays in this way, and that 
people enjoy each other's company ? And it's beyond, just go to the break room, there's a free piece of 
cake. As compared to, let's celebrate the fact that this is our  friend. This is our colleague. This is our 
coworker. And that we know Jerry has a sense of humor. And so w e all enjoyed getting together and 
finding the various items, such as the black balloons, and the over the hill cake, and the candy 
tombstones.  
Now if you picked green, it's pr obably because you work in a co rporate culture where this type of thing is 
completely acceptable. Everyone seems to enjoy it. Everyone see ms to partake in it. There doesn't seem to 
be anyone who is offended by it. But just be careful. Because a t some point, Pandora's box is opened, and 
it can't be closed. So that noti on of where the line is-- maybe  the over the hill caused someone to feel a 
little uncomfortable. Because they're approaching an age they m ay not be comfortable with. But if you 
picked green, it's probably because you're looking at this and thinking, Jerry is fine with it. In our 
corporate culture, we're fine w ith it. Everyone enjoys in the f un. So what would be the problem?  
So let's talk about what might be the problem. Do we know how J erry feels? And is Jerry the only one 
whose feelings matter? Absolutely not. So even if Jerry thought  this was great, and he had no issues with 
it, there may be other people in the company who feel that this  was ageist. There may be other people in 
the company who feel that black balloons indicating that gettin g older means death is not something 
they're comfortable with. So tho se are the things as risk manag ers we need to keep involved. Because it's 
not always so simple as saying, o h, lighten up. Have a sense of  humor. When you have age directly being 
targeted, which you do with an ove r the hill cake, someone may have a concern and feel as if they don't 
have as much value as somebody who isn't over the hill.  
So let's take the scenario a step further. At the party, a long time coworker of Jerry's, Marcy, tells a joke to 
the crowd starting with, "Well, back when Jerry started here, t he dinosaurs roamed the Earth." It's corny. 
It's a little cheeseball. But it got a laugh. Alan follows Marc y's joke with, "For Jerry, these days an all-
nighter means not getting out of be d to pee." Again, it's corny . Jerry laughed. It didn't seem to be a 
problem. Then Nilda jumps up and says, "Jerry, these days getti ng a little action means your morning 
dose of Metamucil worked."  
So are these jokes a red moment-- stop, shouldn't be happening- - a yellow moment-- well, maybe-- or a 
green moment-- not a problem?  
So if you picked red, you proba bly had a reaction to these are definitely jokes based on age. And you're 
not comfortable with the ageis t jokes. Because you're looking a t Jerry, and you're thinking, he looks like a 
fit, happy, active guy. These jokes don't seem appropriate. Or maybe you're looking at the faces of other 
people in the room who are doing  the polite laugh and not neces sarily engaging in true joy at the moment, 
as compared to, I'm going to go along with it. So the red momen t here is these are definitely age-related 
jokes. So even if Jerry's comfo rtable with it, doesn't mean eve rybody else is.  
So if you picked yellow, you again are probably focused on, wel l, she said Jerry laughed. So if Jerry's OK 
with it, and everyone else seems to be OK with it-- and these a re his coworkers making these age jokes-- 
well, why is it a problem? Maybe it isn't. So that's why you we nt with yellow. Let's go back to the 
perception of the person who's offended is what matters, not th e intent of Alan, Marcy, or Nilda. They 
may have been perfectly comfort able, and they thought Jerry wou ld appreciate the jokes, and that they've 
known each other for a long time, a nd this is the sort of thing  that they have no pr oblem with as far as 
engaging in this way with each o ther. It doesn't mean that the many other coworkers who attend the party 
are comfortable with these age-related jokes.   
22 So green. If you pick green, you probably, again, have a corpor ate culture, or you're familiar with these 
type of parties, and these type o f black balloons, and over the  hill cakes, and you think, have a sense of 
humor. It's not a problem. Again, it's not a problem until it's  a problem. And in this case, you may upset 
somebody in the room who's not dealing well with aging, and who  says, I didn't like the jokes. I didn't 
think they were funny. I didn' t think that just because Jerry t urned 60 that all of a sudden he has all these 
physical problems that we need to be talking about. So green in  this case is probably not going to be your 
best choice. But again, it could be a culture issue. But even w ith a culture issue, i f you have someone 
who's offended, you may end up with a complaint. And you may en d up with HR involved.  
So let's go back to, do we rea lly know how Jerry feels? And aga in, is Jerry the only one whose feelings 
matter? Since we don't know how Jerry feels-- we know he laughe d. We know he had a moment or two 
where he enjoyed the camarader ie. And he enjoyed the silliness.  But did he do the polite, yeah, I'll laugh, 
but it really didn't make me happy. And I didn't like having my  age poked fun at. We don't know in this 
particular scenario. But we also don't know, was Jerry the only  one who necessarily had to have his 
feelings considered? No. We had ma ny coworkers at the party. An d they may not have been comfortable 
with the ageist jokes. Or maybe they were. And that's this sort  of thing, unfortunately, we find out after 
the fact.  
So let's say, as the risk manager, what would you do if one of Jerry's coworkers had reached out to you to 
assist with the party planning? W ould that be a red, oh no, I w on't get involved? Yellow, maybe? Or 
green, absolutely, I love Jerry, moment?  
So if you picked red, you probably were erring on the side of c aution in that, whatever's going to happen, 
I don't want management to be a part of it moment. And that's p robably the safe way to go. At the same 
time, maybe you've known Jerry f or a long time. And you want to  be involved in the party planning. But 
this is also one of those moment s where maybe you get some othe r people involved as well to make sure 
that everyone's feeling comfor table with the plans. Because 30 years is something that definitely deserves 
a little respect and a little honor.  
Now if you picked yellow, because as the risk manager you were trying to weigh, well, I really like Jerry. 
I'd like to help with the party planning. Maybe if I was involv ed, things wouldn't get out of hand. But 
even if you were involved, we had black balloons. We had a blac k cake, over the hill, and tombstone 
candy. So this was still a moment  where you were probably gaugi ng, but in my culture, people like Jerry 
would think this was funny. Most of us would think it was funny . And so we're going to go with that. 
Again, just be prepared. There 's still probably a risk. And as the risk manager, as a member of the 
management team, you being invol ved could put a stamp of approv al that the company is necessarily 
engaging in age-related conduct.  
So if you picked green, you're probably saying, what's the prob lem? Jerry has been with us a long time. I 
know Jerry as a risk manager. I'm going to participate in the p arty, because I know he'd appreciate having 
a good party thrown. Thirty years of service is something we ne ed to honor. But again, that notion of as 
the risk manager you are a memb er of management. So unlike a co worker, unlike Marcy, and Allen, and 
Nilda, you're actually management. And so what you do can neces sarily bind the company. So that's a 
little bit of caution on being invo lved in party planning where  you know a protected category is going to 
be front and center as far as the theme of the party.  
Now, would you change your mind if Jerry had been a mentor to y ou in your early days at the company? 
And you knew he had a great sense of humor? And you knew he'd e ngaged in this kind of humor with his 
colleagues, this banter with his colleagues? And that he would have no problem at all with the black 
balloons, the cake, and the tombst one candy? Is that a red, yel low, or green moment based on the fact that 
Jerry was your mentor? Red, doesn 't matter if he's my mentor. S till not going to do it . Yellow, well, 
maybe that mentor puts me in a different position. Or green, ye ah, it's my mentor. I'd certainly do it.   
23 Let's go with red. He may have b een your mentor. He may have a great sense of humor. But you're 
management. And as management, your actions bind the company. S o even though Jerry may have a 
great sense of humor, and he loved every minute of it, and he w asn't offended in any w ay, does that mean 
that somebody else who was 64, or somebody else who is 50, or s omeone else who just turned 40 may not 
have been offended by the focus on the age and the age-related jokes? So as management, we still need to 
keep that in mind.  
Now if you picked yellow, you were probably trying to weigh you r relationship with Jerry to your duties 
to the company as a manager. And even though Jerry's been your mentor, and even though you know he's 
had a great sense of humor for years, you're still management. It still may be problematic later to say, yes, 
as manager, even though he's b een my mentor, and even though I know he had no problem with it, I 
participated in an event that was directly related to his age. And even though we're also celebrating the 
fact that he has 30 years of service with the company, it seeme d as if the 60th birthday took over with the 
over the hill cake.  
Now if you picked green, you're obviously focusing on your clos e relationship with Je rry and his being a 
mentor to you. And you want to be able to honor it in a way tha t you know Jerry would appreciate. That 
he has a great sense of humor. That he would enjoy every minute  of this. But let's go back to the fact that 
you're a manager. And your conduct binds the company. So as a m anager, you still need to have a sense 
of caution about participating in an event that is obviously fo cusing on age. 
 
 
     
 
    
 
     24 Chapter 8 
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) 
Let's talk about the Family Medical Leave Act, wh ich can be the bane of the existence of many in HR and 
risk manager. It's difficult to apply the act because of the 12 weeks of leave and necessarily how it starts 
and how it ends, and to balance these of the company during tha t time. But the FMLA exists fo r man y 
purposes. 
It provid es certain employees with up to 12 weeks of unpaid, jo b-protected leave per year. It also req uires 
their group health b enefits to be maintained during that leave. So employees are eligib le for FMLA leave 
if they've worked for their empl oyer at least 12 months an d at least 1,250 h ours over the past 12 months 
prior to  the request for leave,  and they w ork in a location whe re the compan y emplo ys 50 or more 
emplo yees with in 75 miles. So those are your p arameters.  
Whether an employee has worked the minimum 1,250 hours of servi ce is d etermined acco rding to  FLSA 
principles, that Fair Labor Standards Act, for determining  compensable hours of work. So the FMLA 
applies to public agencies, all public an d priv ate employers, and secondary scho ols and co mpanies with 
50 or more employees. So if you don't have 50 employees, this d oesn't apply to you. But if you do have 
50 emplo yees, this d efinitely will ap ply to you.  
So employers in this particular circumsta nce must provid e an el igible employee with up to 12 weeks of 
unpaid leave each year. And again, you get to define the y ear, whether it's a rolling year or calendar year, 
look forward or look back, for any of the following  reasons-- for the birth and care of a newborn child of 
an employee, fo r placement with the employee of a child for adoption or foster care, to care for an 
immediate family m ember, spouse, child, or parent-- it's very i mportant. Notice sibling isn't necessarily 
mentioned-- spouse, child , or parent with a serious health cond ition.   
And it can be a person  who stands in loco parentis-- in other w ords, someone wh o served as the parent. 
An aunt or a grandparent can sometimes serve as the parent. In  that case, they become an immediate 
family m ember. Or to take medical leave when the employee is un able to work becau se of a serious 
health condition of their own. That's probably the most common. There's also some leave for military 
status and military care and th ings like that.  
So workers comp leave, ADA, and FMLA tend  to intersect a lot. A nd it's usu ally not just one, but a 
combination of more than one t hing. So let's talk about a scena rio. We're going to go back to  Mindy to do 
that.  
We're goin g to add some facts to Mindy's situatio n. She's been with the company for six years prior to 
announcing her pregnancy. She' s eligible for FMLA, and sh e requests the full 12 weeks at the FMLA 
leave. Her docto r completes th e necessary FMLA paperwork for the full 12 weeks of FMLA leave.  
Keep  in min d for the birth of a child , it's not just the childb irth, but also wh at they call play with the b aby 
time-- in  other wo rds, bon ding time.  So she has th e full 12 wee ks of leave. Her docto r has said  she needs 
it. An d she's scheduled for her l eave starting on December 1st.  Because remember, she is excited to have 
that Christmas baby.   
25 On November 20th, Mindy has a work injury. She did nothing wron g. Certain boxes weren't stacked 
properly. And when she went to pick an item out of the box, the  entire box tipped, and the items fell on 
her, and she fell down on the fl oor. She sprained her ankle, sp rained her wrist, and had contusions on her 
right knee and hip.  
As Ms. Risk Manager, you were ma de aware of the accident, and y ou're a bit concerned, knowing that 
Mindy is eight months pregnant . You personally engaged with the  adjuster via phone on November 24, 
and the adjuster tells you that she wants to send Mindy for a C T scan.  
Mindy has told the adjuster not  just no, but emphatically no, n o, no. She will not go for a CT scan. She 
feels really uncomfortable because she is very pregnant. And ev en though the doctor has not provided 
Mindy, to date, with a no-return-to-work slip, Mindy hasn't com e back to work since November 20th, the 
date of her accident.  
So a lot of things to consider here, but we're going to break i t down a bit. How do you deal with Mindy's 
return to work-- the fact that sh e hasn't come back to work sin ce November 20th, she doesn't necessarily 
have PTO time left. She's used it up during her pregnancy. She' s supposed to be going on FMLA leave on 
December 1, and she's had a workplace accident where she's refu sing treatment.  
So again, we're breaking this dow n to the return to work. She's  not willing to come back to work, and the 
doctor hasn't yet provided her with a no-return-to-work slip be cause she hasn't gone for the CT scan. So in 
thinking about all of these things  at once, as the risk manager , how do you respond to Mindy's conduct?  
Do you keep her employed? Do you tell her she can't come back t o work? Do you tell her she's violated 
company policy by refusing to work and that she's terminated?  
So if you believe that Mindy's return to work and her refusal t o return to work is a stop moment, that she 
is violating company policy, and you're going to fire her, we'r e going to tell you to pick red. If you're not 
sure what to do, because we have so many different things inter secting, we're going to tell you yellow. 
And if you're looking at it and saying, I'm just not going to s ee this as a problem in any way, she's 
pregnant, of course she doesn't w ant a CT scan, no issues at al l, I want you to pick green.  
So for those of you who picked red, you're focusing on the fact  that she's had a work comp injury. She's 
not returned to work without an y excuse from a doctor saying sh e shouldn't be at work. You're focused on 
the company policies, which say  no show, no call means you're t erminated.  
But think of how many protected categories we have here. We hav e pregnancy. We have a work comp 
injury, and we have the fact that  FMLA leave is scheduled in da ys. So you're looking at the potential for 
pregnancy discrimination claim . You're looking for the potentia l for a work comp retaliation claim. And 
you're also looking for the poten tial of a FMLA interference cl aim.  
That's called a lot of zeroes. And that's also called a lot of risk for your company. So this is the time 
where you may not want to n ecessarily take that hard line. You call in a team, you consider what's going 
on, and you consider all of your options as well as your risks.   
So if you picked yellow, you're not really sure what to do. I d on't blame you. This is usually a call a 
lawyer moment. At the same time, you're an experienced risk man ager. You've got a team behind you.  
Gather that team together. Talk about how do we address this. I  think everyone can agree that Mindy is 
probably being very cautious in saying I don't want to hurt the  baby, I'm not doing a CT scan. I haven't 
necessarily read a whole lot of information that makes me feel comfortable that I should be doing this at 
eight months pregnant.  
And you also consult Dr. Google, and you find out that, yeah, i t's probably not a good idea to necessarily 
be having a CT scan when her accident was what? Sprains and bru ises. Now, again, we all know that can 
get a whole lot worse. But this is definitely a caution moment,  so I don't blame you for saying maybe I 
need a little bit more information before I make a decision.   
26 So when you're looking at green and you're saying, no problem, we're not going to deal with this at all, 
we're just going to let December 1st get here, we're going to j ust have no pay for that time period, and 
we're going to let her go quietly on her FMLA leave, and we'll let the adjuster continue to do their work 
on the workers comp side and let them know she's very pregnant and really does not feel that it's 
appropriate to have a CT scan.  
So as risk manager, how do yo u necessarily respond to Mindy's c onduct of saying I'm not doing this, I'm 
not doing this, and her not returning to work? Do you call her?  Do you call the adjuster? How do you 
necessarily deal with that?  
Well, there's more than one way t o consider how to approach Min dy. But think about this. She's excited. 
She's having a baby. And then she  has a work accident that she didn't cause. You heard in our scenario 
she did nothing to make this happen.  
So she's probably feeling scared . She's probably feeling uncert ain. She's probably worried about her 
employment. She's worried about her job. And she's probably foc used on the fact that-- come on, I've got 
FMLA leave in less than this many  days. Can we just get me ther e?  
So let's talk about just getting Mindy there. Knowing that Mind y had FMLA leave planned in less than 
two weeks from the date of her accident, you're looking at her PTO, you see she's exhausted all of the 
leave available to her other tha n that FMLA leave that's coming  up because she had some serious 
pregnancy-related absences and issues. She had a few issues tha t required her to be away. And again, she 
was being cautious and making sure she was taking care of her b aby.  
Now, the company's handbook actually says that without having a ccrued leave, having three days off will 
result in termination. Would you t erminate Mindy on November 24 th? Because that would be her third 
day off without a doctor's note and without having the leave th at the company says sh e has to have to be 
off.  
So is this a red moment of no, no, no, no, we don't terminate M indy, a yellow moment of not sure, or a 
green moment of yeah, employee handbook says we terminate?  
So if you picked red, saying no, no, no, no, no, I'm too worrie d about those three protected categories of 
she's pregnant, she had a work comp injury, and she also has FM LA leave coming up-- even though the 
handbook says you're going to be terminated, you might want to talk to HR about having a little bit more 
wiggle room in that language in the future. Because you don't w ant to necessarily have an automatic 
termination.  
Because think of the situation we just talked about. These thin gs happen in real life. And so do you really 
want to terminate an employee who's been very good for you, who  has been a value to not only to the 
team but the company , on November 24th simply because she no lo nger has three days of PTO because of 
pregnancy-related complications?  
So let's take a look at yellow. If you picked yellow, you proba bly did it because, well, the handbook says 
it. But you feel very uncomfort able, because you remember Mindy  was a valued employee by both her 
teammates and management. You're w orried that she's pregnant wi th work comp injury on FMLA leave.  
So even though the handbook says that, you're not quite sure th at you want to necessarily enforce that 
handbook policy. So you're, again, going to look at maybe we ne ed to soften how that policy is written. 
Because, of course, the ADA could also require you to have addi tional days off.  
So those of you that said green-- she's terminated, handbook sa ys it, we follow the policy-- that can be 
risky business, simply because following a policy without think ing about the various laws that impact that 
particular employee and the pr otected category won't necessaril y put you into a defensible position in any 
litigation or in any EEOC charge.   
27 Because let's go back to that whole notion of reasonable accomm odation, and let's go back to the 
Pregnancy Discrimination Act. And Mindy just had a work comp ac cident. So even though there's no 
guaranteed protected leave, like under the FMLA for work comp a ccident, what kind of an employer are 
you going to look like that when someone has an injury and they 're eight months pregnant, that you 
terminate them within three days  of having the injury? That wil l definitely lead you not only to several 
lawsuits, but probably a re taliation lawsuit as well.  
One other thing I want to remind you of in this particular scen ario is possibly the ADA. We don't know if 
Mindy has any other issues that she's never made us aware of, p erhaps. But keep this in mind. The ADA 
says leave can be a reasonable accommodation.  
Now, is work comp leave protect ed? No, it's not. But we also ha ve the notion of pregnancy-related leave 
can be protected. So the fact that she was pregnant when she ha d the work comp injury may come into 
play.  
So let's say the company makes th e prudent and risk-averse deci sion to provide Mindy with unpaid leave 
starting on November 21st until her FMLA leave on December 1st kicks in. And let's say that instead of 
addressing any promotions prior t o Mindy's FMLA leave, during h er leave, Fred is actually promoted.  
Fred engages in some department reorganization as soon as he's promoted to that team lead position, and 
it's decided that Mindy's position will be eliminated in that d epartment. Is Fred's decision to eliminate 
Mindy's position while she's out on FMLA leave a red, yellow, o r green moment?  
So if you pick red, a stop-- no, Fred should not be terminating  Mindy while she's out on FMLA leave, 
you're probably focused on the fact that during leave, that emp loyee is protected. In other words, when 
they come back, they're supposed to return to the same or a sim ilar position.  
However, Fred engaged a reorgani zation. He didn't just pick Min dy out because she was on FMLA leave 
or because she had recently given  birth. He picked her out beca use he reorganized the department and 
said we simply don't need her position. Is that defensible?  
Well, I guess that depends on wh at the company's corporate reco rds look like. Is it necessarily a decision 
that you want Fred making while she's out on leave? Probably no t. But it still may be-- look, we've been 
losing money in this department for the past year and a half. T his is what we need to do to be able to 
return the company to a positive revenue position. But again, i s that going to stop the lawsuit from 
coming? Probably not.  
So those of you who picked yellow, again, were being cautious. You wanted to make sure that, well, why 
did Fred pick her position for elimination? Because back when w e said Mindy was well-liked, Mindy was 
being considered for that promo tion. And during her leave, they  promote Fred.  
So you've got a moment where you really want more information. You want to know about Fred's 
background, what his personnel f ile looks like, how he's though t of by colleagues, and whether, in this 
case, he is the better candidate than Mindy.  
So if you picked green, you're like, you know what, reorganizat ions happen all the time. They didn't select 
Mindy on purpose. They simply selected her position. And even t hough she's on FMLA leave, she's not 
protected from the company doing a reorganization, which would be true. But it's still something that you 
might want to think about before you just jump off a cliff and say it's not going to be a problem.  
How many protected categories does Mindy have? She has pregnanc y, she has a work comp injury, and 
now she has an FMLA issue where, during her leave, an adverse e mployment decision impacted her. So 
could she say it's because she took leave? She certainly could allege that.  
So as a risk manager, what do you need to know was done to defe nd the decision for the reorganization 
and to make sure that the decision wasn't pregnancy, work comp injury, or FMLA leave related? Well, 
you're certainly going to want to look at personnel files.   
28 You're certainly going to want to  look at whether there was a p ossibility, possibly, for Mindy to switch to 
another job, whether there was a possibility that Fred may have  been promoted simply because Mindy 
wasn't there. These are all thi ngs, as risk manager, you want t o work with HR to have an opportunity to 
explore to better put the company in a position where they will  be able to be in a defensible position and 
be able to have that very difficult conversation with Mindy whe n she comes back.  
What if, instead of terminating Mindy during her FMLA leave, th ey say although your position has been 
eliminated, there is a job opening in another department where you'll make the same wages, but it's a 
night shift position? Is moving Mi ndy to a night shift position  a red stop moment, a yellow-- maybe it will 
be OK, or a green no problem moment?  
Well, if you picked red, you're probably worried about the fact  that there is a big difference between a day 
shift position and a night shift position. And there are times when moving someone from day shift to 
night shift can be perceived as retaliatory, and it's a way to rather force somebody to quit.  
Particularly in light of the fact that we all know Mindy is hav ing a baby-- so finding a babysitter who will 
necessarily cover the night shift is going to be even harder. A nd we hear that complaint a lot from people 
who are on the night shift. So this is probably a caution momen t and a stop moment where you say, yeah, 
even though it's the same job, b asically with the same wages, t hat night shift position makes it 
problematic.  
So if you picked yellow, you probably did it going, well, maybe  Mindy wants the night shift. Maybe the 
fact that she has someone who can  care for her child at night a  whole lot easier for her, and that she has 
always wanted night shift. But do we know that? We don't know t hat without knowing what Mindy 
wants. But that may be what you' re thinking. Well, let's find o ut what Mindy wants before we say we 
should or shouldn't do this.  
And if you picked green, saying, not a problem, it's the same a mount of money, we're not worried about 
it, you want to have a moment t o step back here and say what wi ll be the impact of night shift on Mindy 
where she's always had a day shi ft position. Would this be a mo ment where you look at the FMLA, where 
you look at pregnancy, and you look at the fact that she had a work comp injury, and you go, yeah, you're 
trying to force me out the door because you know this won't wor k for me. So green probably isn't going to 
be your best choice here.  
So as risk manager, would you have  been involved in the plannin g of the reorganization? I'm certain you 
would've liked to have been at that table, because you would ha ve had an opportunity to say let's talk 
about the risk. Let's talk about how much this could impact the  company as far as litigation after the fact, 
and frankly, possibly losing a v aluable employee, because we've  said many times, Mindy was well 
respected by both her colleagues and management.  
What may you have done differen tly if you had been at that tabl e? You may have done a lot of things 
differently. But at the same time, you have to get yourself inv ited to that table, even if you forced that 
invitation, to make sure that you're there to say, look, I want  to know why are these decisions being made, 
how they impact the team, how they impact the organization, and  how I may be able to be involved and 
interact with all of these parti es so that we can keep the corp orate culture alive and we can keep our 
culture of compliance alive.  
Is Mindy protected from change  simply because she's on FMLA lea ve? No. Changes can still happen. But 
it's better when they are a formal, company-wide reorganization  rather than just Fred and Fred's 
department, and Fred possibly having an issue with Mindy and wa nting to move her along because she 
may be better liked than he is.  
So these are all issues that you and risk management need to ke ep in mind and keep that place at the table 
so that you can have an opportunity to not only impact the orga nization, but help save the organization as 
far as a bottom line number and as far as keeping valuable empl oyees.   
29 Chapter 9 
Retaliation 
Retaliation 
And just when you think it's safe to enter the water again, we' re going to talk about something that can 
impact you even if you are able to prevail on the underlying cl aim that you didn't discriminate on the 
basis of race, gender, national origin, religion, pregnancy, ag e. All those categories. 
It's called retaliation. And retaliation is a separate cause of  action. You can sue for just retaliation. You 
can sue for having said, I made a complaint. I was treated diff erently after making the complaint, and, 
therefore, you have retaliated ag ainst me. So there's three ele ments to a retaliation claim. 
The first is, one, you engage in protected activity. An employe e complains about harassment to the HR 
department. Two, there's an adve rse action. The employee's demo ted or treated unfairly or treated 
differently after making the complaint. And this can actually b e interpreted very broadly. And three, there 
has to be a causal connection. You have to be able to demonstra te as the employee that the treatment was 
because of the complaint that you made. 
So retaliation claims are difficult, because they're based on f act, not law . It's harder to get a summary 
judgment, which is a legal term for saying, we don't have to go  to trial. Because factual issues aren't 
appropriate for summary judgment. Those go to trial. 
So let's talk about an adverse action. An adverse action can be  a very slight thing. It's anything an 
employee perceives as retaliation from the employer. Examples i nclude demotion, pretty easy. Failure to 
promote, saying, well, but for m e having made a complaint, I wo uld have that job. 
A lower valuation than the prior year after having made a compl aint. A change in hour s or shift. A change 
of office or workspace. Change o f title. A change or reduction of job responsibilities so that you become 
insignificant. Shunning, which is not going out to lunch with c olleagues, not being invited to go out to 
lunch, not being invited to go to happy hour, not being invited  to go bowling, hunting, fishing, whatever it 
is. 
There was even a case where not m aking eye contact regularly wi th the employee in the hallway was 
viewed as retaliation. Retaliation claims are the largest and f astest-growing employment claim type. So 
out of the 97,443 charges filed with the EEOC in 2016, 42,018 o f those were retaliation claims. In other 
words, 45.9 percent of all claims filed the EEOC included retal iation or focused on retaliation. 
Now retaliation is usually brought in combination with another claim. In other words, I was sexually 
harassed, I complained about it , they retaliated against me. Re taliation claims are just troubling to have to 
defend. Because, again, even if t he employer prevails on the fa ct that someone was not sexually harassed, 
it doesn't mean that they can't say, well, they weren't retalia ted against for having made that complaint. 
So let's give you an example. A female employee complains of di scrimination after a promotion is given 
to a less-qualified male. Following the complaint, her hours ch ange from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. to the 
night shift, 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The lawsuit asserted discr imination in retaliation. And ultimately, that 
particular employee lost her discrimination claim, but the reta liation claim was held to be valid.  
30 So why that's important is that impacts risk management, becaus e attorney's fees are going to be involved. 
So even though, in a way, they won the battle, they lost the wa r. Because their retaliation claim was going 
to go forward. And attorney's fees were still going to be an is sue. 
So let's talk about a workers c ompensation retaliation case. Be cause this is something you're probably 
going to either see a lot of or experience as a risk manager. S o if an injured worker is fired in close 
proximity to the workplace accident, the injured worker can hav e an additional cause of action against 
their employer for workers  compensation retaliation. 
This is a discrimination cause of action. And why that's really  important is your workers comp policy 
doesn't cover retaliation. As a matter of fact, it specifically  excludes it. So retaliation cause of action is 
filed in circuit civil federal court. Because it's retaliation.  It's a discrimination cause of action. 
Which means unless your client has employment practices liabili ty insurance, there is no insurance for it, 
and they're going to be paying th e fees for that for both their  lawyer and possibly the other side's, if they 
lose. So it's really important to keep in mind that anybody who  is looking at terminating an employee 
within hours-- or frankly, days a nd a few weeks-- of someone ha ving a work comp accident, you're 
practically inviting a retaliation claim. 
So let's talk about Mindy again, because we know she already ha d that work comp accident. Mindy is told 
her position has been eliminated . She's offered that night shif t position, she doesn't accept it. Instead, she 
tells you as the risk manager-- who's been working with her thr oughout her work comp leave, throughout 
her FMLA leave-- that she believ es the company views her as a l iability and damaged goods, and she 
wants to make a formal complaint to HR. 
You advise HR that Mindy has a concern to share. HR reaches out  to Mindy and conducts an 
investigation, as they should and as is stated in your company' s employee handbook. And during that 
investigation, you learn that Fre d was concerned that Mindy was  outshining him. And that he told other 
employees that he'd get rid of her first chance he had. 
At the end of the investigation , HR determines that Fred's deci sion had legitimate business reasons behind 
it, due to the reduction in orders received in that particular department. 
So is the decision to not provide Mindy with a new job or to sa y that Fred made an inappropriate decision 
a red moment? In other words, s top, this should not be happenin g. A yellow moment, I still need more 
information. Or a green moment, not a problem. So let's talk ab out red, the stop moment that Fred should 
not have been making the decisi on to get rid of Mindy, in light  of the fact that he obviously was a little 
jealous of her and was telling other employees, I'll fire her a s soon as I have the chance. Those are the sort 
of things that make for great deposition testimony and great te stimony on the stand at any trial. 
Because Mindy was a valued emplo yee. Mindy was liked by managem ent coworkers. So the fact that 
Fred may have been jealous of he r is a problem, because Fred is  male and Mindy is fem ale. But we're also 
focused here on workers comp ret aliation. We're focused on the fact that she had an accident. And within 
weeks of having had an accident, she's terminated. 
Most employers wouldn't keep a poorly performing employee on th e books for months just to avoid a 
retaliation claim. So most judges don't look at keeping an empl oyee employed as a problem. But in this 
case, the company didn't keep Min dy employed. She was fired dur ing her leave. She was fired during her 
FMLA leave, which, again, could be a retaliation claim under FM LA. But she was also fired within close 
proximity to her workers comp injury. So let's say it was withi n four weeks. So that's probably going to 
be not a good decision, to have p ermitted Fred to terminate her . And for HR to go, oh, no, we'll rely on 
the legitimate business reasons tha t Fred said he had for elimi nating her position. 
This is definitely a moment where-- as risk-- you want to say, I'm here to protect the company. I'm here to 
protect the company's bottom line. And this is going to cost us  a lot of money in litig ation fees, even if we 
prevail. You can still spend six figures in attorney's fees.  
31 So let's take that yellow mome nt, all of our cautious people. Y ou're wondering, well, what were the 
legitimate business reasons behi nd Fred eliminating Mindy's pos ition and terminating her? Because he 
said it was because there was reduction in orders received in t hat department. 
You'd want to know as risk manager, how many months of that do we have? How many years of that do 
we have? Or do we simply have f our weeks of time? Which, of cou rse, would cause you to want to put 
the brakes on any termination of  Mindy. Because there's simply not enough data to say, well, that was a 
legitimate business reason to eliminate a productive employee w ho was well-liked and performing well. 
So, green. Not a problem. You're  saying, HR conducted the inves tigation. We have confidence in HR. HR 
says it's fine. They say we have legitimate business reasons. W e're going to go with that decision. 
This is the take a deep breath and think about attorney's fees.  Think about how much this could cost you if 
Mindy files a charge of discrimination, goes the route of filin g pregnancy discrimination claim, Family 
Medical Leave Act claim, and th en hitting you on the state cour t side with the workers comp retaliation. 
Because she was terminated within  weeks of having a work comp i njury. And other than the fact that 
allegedly, there is a reduction in orders, she's got a beautifu l personnel file with glowing performance 
evaluations and great comments from not only management but cow orkers. 
So this is the opportunity for risk to get involved and say, we  want to try to make sure that we don't have 
any issues related to discrimina tion. Whether it's work comp re taliation, a discrimination cause of action, 
or Mindy's other protected cate gories. So let's talk about thos e protective categories for just a minute. 
We know we have potential for wo rk comp retaliation. We know we  have pregnancy discrimination. We 
know we have FMLA. Mindy's femal e and Fred is male, so we're go ing to add gender discrimination to 
that. We also don't necessarily kno w Mindy's age or national or igin or race. 
So we could be racking up the categories to six, seven, possibl y more protected categories. So this is the 
type of situation where you want to proceed extremely cautiousl y. You want to make sure that you've 
done the right thing for both the  company and the employee. If you have two years of data showing that 
that particular department is poorly performing, well, you migh t have something to talk about. 
But why Mindy? Why the choice to get rid of Mindy, who otherwis e has a beautiful record of 
employment? Who is well-liked and respected by colleagues. Who is well-liked and respected by 
management. 
So in the world of retaliation, keep in mind that even though y ou may have a legitimate business reason 
for having done what you did, if you're dealing with workers co mpensation retaliation, if it's within a few 
short weeks of someone having a workplace injury, you are provi ding them with a retaliation cause of 
action that they can file separat ely from any work comp claim, or from any other federal claims we 
discussed that Mindy is likel y going to be covered under. 
   
 
    
32 Glossary 
ADA —See Americans with Disabilities Act. 
ADEA —See Age Discrimination in Employment Act. 
adverse action —One of the elements of a retaliation claim. Examples include d enial of a promotion, 
refusal to hire, demotion, suspension, discharge, threats, repr imands, negative evaluations, harassment, 
and change in hours. 
Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) of 1967 —A law that prohibits the making of 
employment decisions (e.g., hiring, promotion) based on age. It  applies to employees or applicants who 
are 40 years or older and to companies with 20 or more employee s. The ADEA specifies various remedies 
if a firm is found to have violated the law. Some of these incl ude hiring an applicant who was 
discriminated against, reinstating a terminated employee, and p aying of back wages, liquidated damages, 
“front” pay until an employee r eaches the age of 70, court cost s, and attorneys’ fees. 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 —A federal statute passed in 1990, primarily aimed at 
preventing discrimination in hiring persons having a “disabilit y” as defined by the Act. Under the ADA, 
employers must afford job appli cants equal opportunity (i.e., e valuating an applicant solely on his/her 
ability to perform the essential functions of a job, regardless  of disability) and make reasonable 
accommodations to allow disabled employees to perform job funct ions. However, employers are relieved 
from the reasonable accommodation requirement if it creates an “undue hardship,” such as excessive 
costs or considerable work disr uption. Alleged violations of th e ADA are one of the leading perils 
covered by employment practices liability insurance (EPLI) poli cies.  
at-will employment —Employment can be terminated for cause or for no cause, at any  time, and with no 
advance notice. The “at-will” employment doctrine is recognized  in most jurisdictions. 
bullying —A type of conduct in which one  person harasses another person over a time period in a 
workplace environment. Bullying is characterized by a pattern o f deliberate, hurtful, and menacing 
behaviors. Bullying can have two aspects: physical—such as maki ng intimidating physical threats, 
pushing, shoving, and invading an  individual’s personal space—o r psychological—such as emotional 
intimidation that is mostly cove rt, including joking or initiat ion rites that may mask sadistic behavior. 
Employees who claim to have been bullied by other employees are  increasingly suing employers. 
Bullying has become so common that more than 30 of states have passed anti-bullying legislation. 
Civil Rights Act of 1991 —A federal act that broadened the scope of Title VII of the Civ il Rights Act of 
1964. The Civil Rights Act of 19 91 gives employees who sue thei r employers the right to a jury trial and 
the right to recover compensatory and punitive damages. Prior t o passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 
successful claimants were entitle d only to awards of back pay a nd lost benefits and were not afforded the 
right to a jury trial. 
common law —Unwritten law derived from cour t case decisions based on custo m and precedent. It is 
contrasted to statutory law. 
 
 
  
33 disability —A condition that incapacitates a person in some way so that he  or she cannot carry on normal 
pursuits. The definition of “disability” in disability income p olicies varies substantially and should be 
carefully examined. Disability may be total, partial, permanent , or temporary or a combination of these. In 
the context of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), “disa bility” is defined as a recorded or 
perceived physical or mental impairment that substantially limi ts one or more major life activities of an 
individual. 
discrimination —(1) The act or process of evalua ting insurable risks and deter mining premiums on the 
basis of likelihood of loss. Insurance laws prohibit “unfair di scrimination”—that is, the formulation of 
rates on the basis of criteria that do not fairly measure the a ctual risk involved. (2) Unfair or illegal 
treatment of or denial of rights to persons on the basis of cer tain arbitrarily chosen attributes or 
characteristics, including race, g ender, religion, creed, age, medical condition, pregnancy, sexual 
orientation/preference, physical appearance, marital status, ph ysical or mental disability, or national 
origin. Discrimination does not usually fall within the coverag e terms of the commercial general liability 
(CGL) policy (and may even be specifically excluded by endorsem ent) but may be covered as a form of 
personal injury (PI) under some  umbrella policies. However, emp loyment practices liability insurance 
(EPLI) covers a variety of employ ment-related claims, including  discrimination. 
employment-at-will doctrine —A legal doctrine holding that, a bsent a contract for a specifi ed duration, 
both employers and employees are free to terminate the employme nt relationship at any time, with or 
without cause, and with or without notice. In recent years, how ever, both courts and legislatures have 
developed a number of exceptions to this doctrine, a factor lar gely responsible for a marked increase in 
claims alleging wrongful termination. 
Equal Pay Act of 1963 —A federal law prohibiting pay discrimination against employees  because of their 
gender. The Act compels businesses to pay equal wages to employ ees performing substantially equal 
work, regardless of the sex of the individual employees. Pay di fferentials may be based on merit, 
seniority, or any lawful factor other than sex. The Equal Pay A ct applies to all businesses regardless of the 
number of employees. Inequalities in pay between men and women for performance of “substantially 
equal jobs” are prohibited, unl ess the differences are due to a  factor other than sex, such as a seniority 
system or merit system. Claims alleging violation of the Equal Pay Act are covered by employment 
practices liability insurance (EPLI) policies. 
fair employment practices laws —Legislation enacted in every st ate that bars discrimination by  private 
employers against defined categories of individuals. Fair emplo yment practices laws are generally 
broader than their federal counterparts, but they are not unifo rm in their protection. 
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 —A law that established a national, hourly minimum wage 
and promulgated eligibility rules for overtime pay. The Wage an d Hour Division of the US Department of 
Labor administers the  law, and virtually all wage and hour clai ms cite a violation of the FLSA. Wage and 
hour claims allege that workers classified by employers as “exe mpt” (and therefore ineligible for overtime 
pay) are, in fact, entitled to ove rtime pay. Wage and hour clai ms are a serious exposure for employers; a 
number of class action wage and hour claims have settled for mo re than $10 million. 
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 —A law allowing employees to take up to 12 weeks 
annually of job-protected unpaid leave. Such leaves are permitt ed in the event of a serious illness of the 
employee or family member or the birth or placement (through ad option or foster care) of a child. The 
law applies to employers having 50 or more employees and to emp loyees who have worked for the 
employer for a minimum of 1,250 hours during the prior year. Ch arges of discrimination against those 
taking leave under the Act (or by those prevented from taking l eave under the Act) can be filed with the 
Department of Labor, which investigates and enforces claims. In  addition, an employee can sue his or her 
employer individually. Such claims are covered by employment pr actices liability (EPL) policies. 
FLSA —See Fair Labor Standards Act.  
34 FMLA —See Family and Medical Leave Act. 
hostile work environment sexual harassment —A form of sexual harassment occurring when such 
conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering w ith an individual’s work performance or 
creating an intimidating, hostile , or offensive working environ ment. Coverage for suc h claims is covered 
under employment practices liability (EPL) policies. 
negligence —A tort involving failure to use a degree of care considered re asonable under a given set of 
circumstances. Acts of either omission or commission or both ma y constitute negligence. The four 
elements of negligence are a dut y owed to a plaintiff, a breach  of that duty by the defendant, proximate 
cause, and an injury or damage suffered by the plaintiff. Liabi lity policies are designed to cover claims of 
negligence. 
reasonable accommodation —As defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 199 0, either 
modifications or adjustments to a job application process or a job performance process that enable a 
qualified applicant with a disability to be considered for or p erform the position or modifications or 
adjustments that allow the disabled worker the same benefits an d privileges afforded other similarly 
situated employees without disabilities. This modification or j ob adjustment must be achieved without 
imposing an undue hardship on the employer’s operations. 
retaliation claims —Such claims result when an employee alleges discrimination bas ed on protected 
status (e.g., race, gender, di sability), and, in retaliation fo r making such a claim, the employee is treated 
adversely (e.g., the employee r eceives a demotion). A successfu l retaliation claim must prove three 
elements: (1) that the employee engaged in a “protected activit y” (filing a discrimination claim, alleging 
corporate misconduct), (2) that the employee suffered an “adver se action” (termination), and (3) that there 
was a causal connection between t he adverse action and the prot ected activity. Employment practices 
liability insurance (EPLI) policies cover retaliation claims. I n recent years, retaliation claims have also 
been made in conjunction with wor kers compensation claims. That  is, employees have sued their 
employers when, in response to f iling a workers compensation cl aim, an employer took some form of 
adverse action against the worker  (e.g., imposing a change in w ork hours, giving the employee a 
demotion or a reprimand). 
sexual harassment —Conduct involving unwelcome sexua l advances, requests for sexu al favors, and 
verbal, visual, or physical conduc t of a sexual nature. There a re two types of sexual harassment: quid pro 
quo sexual harassment, in which sexual contact is made a condit ion of employment, and hostile 
environment sexual harassment, in which such conduct creates an  intimidating, hostile, or offensive 
working environment. Lawsuits against businesses that allege se xual harassment have increased 
significantly during the past decade. Accordingly, around 1990,  the insurance market began offering 
employment practices liability ( EPL) policies, a specialized fo rm of insurance covering claims of sexual 
harassment as well as other employment-related torts. 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 —A law prohibiting discrimination by private sector 
employers. Title VII bars an employer from discriminating on th e basis of race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin in hiring, discharge, or compensation and with regard to any term s, conditions, or 
privileges of employment. An “employer” is defined under Title VII as any person “engaged in an 
industry affecting commerce who has 15 or more employees for ea ch working day in each of 20 or more 
calendar weeks in the current o r preceding calendar year.” An “ employer” can be a sole proprietor, 
partnership, or corporation. A partner is not considered an emp loyee under Title VII. The majority of 
employment-related lawsuits alleging discrimination are brought  under Title VII. 
 
  
35 wage and hour claims —An assertion by an employee-plaintiff that his or her employer  has failed to pay 
overtime wages owed to the employee. Within the past several ye ars, a number of high-profile, high-
dollar wage and hour claims have  been filed on a class action b asis, a fact that has vastly increased the 
dollar amount payable under such lawsuits. Given the magnitude of this exposure, most employment 
practices liability insurance (EPLI) policies specifically excl ude coverage for wage and hour claims. 
whistleblower claim —An assertion that an employee w as penalized (e.g., terminated,  demoted, 
disciplined) for complaining of or opposing certain employer ac tions (e.g., fraudulent billing practices on 
a government contract), refusing to engage in illegal or unethi cal conduct, or exposing such conduct via 
testimony at a trial or administr ative hearing. Whistleblower c laims are a type of retaliation claim and are 
covered by employment practices liability insurance (EPLI) poli cies. 
wrongful termination —The act of terminating an emplo yee in a manner that is against  the law. In recent 
years, erosion of the employment-at-will doctrine has been the factor most responsible for the increase in 
claims alleging wrongful termination. Coverage for this exposur e is provided under employment practices 
liability (EPL) policies. 
 
 